Aeneas’ old nurse, you as well, Caieta,
In dying gave our shores your lasting fame.
The great West keeps your resting place today
In glory—if there’s glory in the grave.
Loyal Aeneas rendered her due rites,
Heaping a mound up. When the deep sea calmed,
He spread his sails and left the port behind.
The breezes blew past nightfall, and the white moon
Lit up their course; the gleaming surface trembled.
They sailed close by the shore of Circe’s country.
The Sun’s rich daughter makes secluded groves there
Resound with constant singing and, in high halls
At nighttime, by the fragrant cedar’s light
Runs her shrill shuttle through the filmy weave.
In the late hours, growls are heard, and roars
Of lions in hot struggles with their chains,
And raging screams of bristly hogs and bears
In pens, and howls from wolves—those hulking shapes,
Once human: potent herbs from that fierce goddess
Gave them the faces and the fur of beasts.
Saving the blameless Trojans from these grim spells,
From landing in that port on deadly shores,
Neptune sent helping winds to fill their sails,
And they escaped beyond the foaming shallows.
The sea blushed with ethereal beams; Aurora
Showed tawny in her rosy chariot.
The wind abated. Instantly the breezes
All calmed, oars toiled in smooth and sluggish water.
Now from the watery plain Aeneas saw
A broad grove, lovely Tiber bursting through—
Darting with whirlpools, yellow with its sand load—
Seaward. All kinds of river birds and shore birds
Fluttered from branch to branch, around and over
The channel, and their songs caressed the sky.
He told his men to turn the prows toward land,
And gladly started up the shaded river.
Erato, let me tell about the times,
The rulers, and what ancient Latium was
When foreigners first beached their army’s fleet
In Italy, and how the quarrels started.
Goddess, direct your poet. Savage warfare
I’ll sing, and kings whose courage brought them death:
The Tuscan army, all Hesperia rallied
To arms. This is a higher story starting,
A greater work for me.
Latinus, old now,
Had reigned through long peace over towns and farmland.
Faunus and a Laurentian nymph, Marica,
We hear, begot him; Picus, Faunus’ father,
Claimed Saturn as his own, the family’s founder.
By the gods’ will, Latinus had no male child;
Sons born to him were taken in their first youth.
An only daughter, hope of that great house,
Was now grown up and ready for a husband.
From Latium’s breadth, from all of Italy
Men courted her. The handsomest was Turnus,
From a strong dynasty. Latinus’ wife
Was ardent, wild to have this son-­in-­law.
But holy signs, each with its terrors, blocked her.
A laurel, long revered, with sacred foliage,
Stood in the central high-­roofed palace shrine.
Father Latinus found it here while building
The town, they say, and offered it to Phoebus,
And named the settlers after it Laurentians.
Now a loud swarm of rumbling bees—amazing
To speak of—crossed the clear air, seized the treetop.
Quickly they intertwined their feet and hung
Down from a leafy branch in one great mass.
An augur said, “I see a warrior
Come from abroad. A phalanx trails these bees
To the same spot—the new lords in your tower.”
When the king burned pure torches on the altar,
And chaste Lavinia stood by her father,
A blaze—uncanny—seemed to catch her long hair.
And all her rich clothes crackled in the flame.
Her regally bound hair, her crown with bright gems
Kindled, and she was wrapped in tawny light
And smoke, and sparks were scattered through the palace—
A wondrous, fearful sight, it was reported.
Prophets foretold a glorious destiny
For her, but for her people mighty conflict.
Anxious, the king approached the oracle
His father, Faunus, spoke through in the grove
The Albunea, king of forests, waters,
Loud with its sacred spring, dark, breathing sulfur.
Here, if perplexed, the tribes of Italy
Seek answers. When a priest has brought his gifts,
He lies on sheepskins from the sacrifices
And goes to sleep beneath the still night sky.
There he sees many eerie fluttering forms,
Hears voices of all kinds, consults with gods,
And speaks to Acheron in Avernan depths.
Father Latinus sought advice in person.
He sacrificed a hundred woolly sheep,
Then lay there resting on their spread-­out fleeces.
Suddenly, from within the grove, a voice:
“My child, shun this alliance for your daughter
With Latins, though a wedding is at hand.
Foreigners will arrive, and intermarriage
Will raise our name to heaven. The descendants
Will bring the earth beneath their feet and rule it
Clear to both oceans that the sun rides over.”
Latinus didn’t keep concealed the warning
His father, Faunus, gave him in the still night.
Rumor had winged it into all the far towns
Of Italy when Trojan forces moored
Their ships off Tiber’s grassy mounded bank.
Aeneas, his lieutenants, and his fine son
Sprawled on the ground beneath a high tree’s branches,
Prepared a meal, and, at Jove’s prompting, set
Spelt wafers on the grass to hold their food,
A cereal base to pile with woodland forage.
All this was eaten; hunger drove them further,
To gnawing at the sheets of bread. Their hands,
Their bold jaws now assaulted the baked disks,
Broad surfaces that fate had sent to them.
“Look how we eat our tables,” Iulus said—
A joke—but those few words first gave a sign
Of hardship’s end. His father seized on them,
Struck by the miracle, and silenced him,
Then cried at once, “Hail, country pledged by fate!
Hail, faithful guardian gods of Troy as well!
This is your home, your land. Father Anchises
(Now I recall) bequeathed this fateful secret:
‘My child, when on strange shores your food is torn
Away, and hunger makes you eat your tables,
Then trust that home and rest are there. Be mindful,
Lay buildings out and raise defensive walls.’
This is that hunger, waiting till the end
To close our exile off.
So at first light let’s fan out eagerly
From where we’ve landed and explore the country—
What people live here? Where is their walled city?
Pour Jove an offering and send my father
Anchises prayers, and bring more wine for feasting.”
Wearing a verdant chaplet, he beseeched
The place’s spirit and the firstborn goddess,
And Earth, and nymphs and rivers still unknown,
And Night, with all her rising signs, and Jove,
God of Mount Ida, and the Phrygian Mother;
Then his own parents—in the sky, below earth.
Thundering three times, the almighty father
In clear high heaven shook a cloud and made it
Blaze out, conspicuous with rays of gold.
The word spread quickly through the Trojan ranks:
The time had come to build their promised walls.
Ecstatic at that great sign, they renewed
The feasting, placing garlands on the wine bowls.
The new day rose, the great lamp spread its light.
They split up, scouted riverbanks, the city
And borders of the tribe. Here was the Tiber—
Numicus’ pooling spring—brave Latins’ home.
Anchises’ son now chose a hundred legates
Of various ranks and sent them to the king’s
Proud walls. They must put on olive crowns
And take him gifts, peace offerings from Trojans.
They hurried to obey and strode there quickly.
Where walls would rise, Aeneas on the shore
Dug a low ditch and labored at their first home,
With battlements and ramparts, like a camp.
The group now made its journey, saw the high roofs
And towers of Latins, and approached the walls.
There boys and thriving young men drilled on horses,
Or trained their chariot teams on dusty tracks,
Pulled tight-­strung bows, hurled pliant javelins,
Or boxed and raced on foot in competition.
A mounted messenger rushed with his news
To the old king: tall men, in foreign clothes.
He ordered them invited in and sat
In the hall’s center, on his forebears’ throne.
Laurentian Picus’ huge and stately palace
Soared with its hundred columns at the town’s crest,
A wooded site the ancients held in awe.
For the good omen, kings took up their scepters
And rods of office there. It housed the Senate
And sacred banquets; there the elders slaughtered
A ram and sat at tables in a long row.
The forebears’ busts were in the vestibule,
Old cedar faces, Italus, Sabinus,
Planter of vines—his sickle hung beneath him—
The old man Saturn, Janus’ double face,
And all the other kings from the beginning,
With heroes wounded in their country’s wars.
On sacred doorposts many war spoils hung:
Axes with curved blades, chariots in bondage,
With plumes from helmets, giant bolts from gates,
Spearheads and shields, and rams torn out of hulls.
Picus himself, horse-­tamer, sat there, shown
In a short cloak. His right hand held the staff
Of Quirinus, his left the sacred shield.
Circe, his lust-­crazed wife, armed with her gold staff
And potions, changed him to a dappled bird.
On his ancestral seat inside this temple,
Latinus called the Teucrians to meet him
And spoke to them serenely when they came:
“Trojans (we know your city and your race;
We heard about you as you sailed this way),
What do you seek? What need has brought your ships here
Through endless blue sea to Italian shores?
If you are lost or swept astray by tempests—
Which many sailors on the deep endure—
And so you broach our river, camp beside
Our port, take refuge here. Be sure that Latins,
Saturn’s race, don’t do right from sheer compulsion
Of law but choose to keep the old god’s ways.
I do remember, though time dims the story,
What old Auruncans said: Born in this country,
Dardanus sailed to Phrygian Ida’s cities
And Thracian Samos, now called Samothrace,
From Corythus, his own Etruscan town.
The starry sky’s gold palace now enthrones him;
He ranks among the gods and has his altars.”
He finished; Ilioneus now answered,
“King, glorious child of Faunus, no black storms,
No roiling billows drove us to your country;
The stars, the coastlines gave us no false guidance.
We all came to your city willingly,
On purpose, exiles from the greatest kingdom—
Once—that the Sun saw, voyaging from the sky’s edge.
Jove first begot our race; in this our people
Delight. From Jove’s high race our king was born:
Trojan Aeneas sent us to your doorstep.
How great a storm from pitiless Mycenae
Poured over Trojan fields, when fate brought two worlds,
Europe and Asia, battering together—
The earth’s remotest people, set apart
By Ocean with its tides, or in the brutal
Tropical middle of the five zones, know this.
Out of that deluge, through vast seas we’ve come,
To beg a tiny home here for our gods,
A harmless beach. Water and air cost nothing!
We will not shame your kingdom—no, your good deed
Will bring you lasting gratitude and glory;
Italians won’t regret embracing Trojans.
I swear it by Aeneas’ fate, his strong hand
Proven in all his friendships and his battles:
Many tribes, many nations have sought union
Or treaties with us. We approach you first
With suppliant words and fillets—do not scorn us.
On gods’ prophetic orders we have sought
Your land—once Dardanus’. Mighty Apollo
Summons us back to the Etruscan Tiber
And to Numicus’ sacred pooling waters.
Our leader sends you gifts, which are his remnants
Of wealth, saved from the flames at Troy. His father
Poured wine out on the altars from this gold bowl.
Priam, proclaiming laws to gathered nations,
Held this rod, wore this holy crown, these clothes,
The work of Trojan women.”
Latinus, stunned by Ilioneus’ words,
Sat there unmoving, gazing at the floor.
But his eyes moved in thought. Embroidered purple
And Priam’s scepter touched him less. He dwelt
More on his daughter’s wedding and her union.
Old Faunus’ presage—in his heart he mulled it:
This was the foreign voyager fate pledged him
As son-­in-­law, to join him as an equal
In ruling; his descendants would be heroes,
And all the world would come beneath their power.
At last he spoke in joy: “Gods bless our plans
And their own prophecy. Take what you ask for;
And I accept your gifts. While I am reigning,
You’ll have a rich land, you’ll have wealth like Troy’s.
But if Aeneas has such eager longing
To be my guest here and be called my ally,
Then let him come—a friend’s face holds no terror.
I’ll clasp your king’s hand, making good this treaty.
But you must take this message back to him:
I have a daughter whom an oracle
And many heavenly signs forbid my giving
To one of our race. Strangers come to Latium
Will be our sons through marriage, and the new stock
Will reach the stars. I think—I hope—it’s this man
Fate calls for, if my intuition’s right.”
The lord chose from the sleek three hundred horses
Housed in his high-­roofed barn. He had one led
To every Trojan there, down through their ranks—
Swift mounts—and they had saddlecloths embroidered
With purple, and gold collars hanging down.
Their trappings were of gold; they chewed gold bits.
A chariot and team were for Aeneas,
A fire-­breathing pair, heavenly mix-­breeds:
Sly Circe’d stolen stallions from her father
To cross with mortal mares. Aeneas’ men,
Now mounted high, conveyed Latinus’ gifts,
Speeches, and terms for peace back to the camp.
Then Jove’s fierce wife flew in her chariot
From Inachus’ home, Argos. From on high,
In far-­off Pachynus in Sicily,
She saw Aeneas happy, with his fleet:
They worked at building, settled trustingly,
Forgot their ships. She halted, pierced by grief,
Then shook her head, and from her heart poured this:
“That hated Phrygian race, their fate opposed
To mine! They couldn’t die on Sigeum’s plain,
Couldn’t stay conquered? Trojans couldn’t burn
When Troy burned? Through the fire and the onslaughts
They found a way. At last, I guess, my power
Lies slack and weary from its load of hatred.
I even stooped to persecute their exile,
Harrying refugees across the ocean.
The sea and sky have no strength left to fight them.
What good the Syrtes, Scylla, vast Charybdis?
Trojans nest in the longed-­for Tiber, fearing
Neither the deep nor me. Mars’ strength destroyed
The monstrous Lapiths. Jove, who sired the gods,
Assuaged Diana’s rage with Calydon,
The ancient town. What great crimes earned such sanctions?
But I, Jove’s mighty wife, have shrunk from nothing,
Tried every useless way, and now am beaten—
Aeneas did this! If my own power fails,
I’ll find help anywhere I can—no scruples!
Heaven resists me? I’ll try Acheron.
Fate grants them entrance to the Latin kingdom;
Lavinia must be Aeneas’ wife.
But I can put off these great happenings,
And crush the subjects of this pair of kings:
Marriage, allying them, will have this price;
Blood from both sides will dower you, child; Bellona
Will be your escort. Fire as a bridegroom
Hasn’t been born from Hecuba alone.
No, Venus’ child will be another Paris,
A funeral torch to burn a reborn Troy.”
Terrible now, she sped to earth, to summon
Allecto, mourning-bringer, from her dark home
Below among the Furies. Treachery,
War, rage, atrocities are in her heart.
Her father, Pluto, and her hellish sisters
Loathe her themselves, the monster; all her dire forms
And faces, all the black snakes sprouting from her.
Now Juno made this speech, inciting her:
“Daughter of Night, lend me your special service
And safeguard my prestige. Keep it from yielding;
Don’t let Aeneas’ crew buy off Latinus
Through marriage, or lay siege to Italy.
You can set brothers who were friends at war,
Destroying homes with hate, invading them,
Whip, flames of death in hand. A thousand names
Are yours, a thousand torments. Rouse your genius,
Shatter their treaties, sow the seeds of war—
War! Wished, demanded, started all at once!”
Allecto, steeped in Gorgon poisons, rushed
To the Laurentian king’s high halls in Latium
And lurked there, at the threshold of Amata,
Who smoldered with a woman’s anxious anger:
Trojans had come—would they steal Turnus’ wedding?
Dark snakes made up the Fury’s hair: she tossed one
To glide—maddening, hellish—through the dress
Into the heart, and rattled all the house.
Beneath her clothes it coiled, around her smooth breasts.
She couldn’t feel it as it breathed its poison—
Her frenzy. As a gold chain, that huge serpent
Twined her neck, hung as ribbon from her headband,
Wove through her hair and slid around her body.
The venom oozed in, and the sickness started
To storm her senses, wrap her bones in fire.
Before the flames engulfed her heart and mind,
She spoke quite gently, as a mother would,
And wept: Her daughter married to a Phrygian!
“You’ll give Lavinia to Trojan exiles,
Not pitying your child, yourself, or me?
The lying pirate’s sure to snatch our girl
Off to the deep on the first wind. That’s how
The Phrygian shepherd infiltrated Sparta
And hauled off Helen, Leda’s child, to Troy.
Your oath? The love you once had for your people?
Your promises to Turnus, who is family?
If Latins need a foreign son-­in-­law,
And it is fixed and ordered by your father,
Then every land that’s free, outside our power,
Is foreign, I think—can’t the gods mean that?
Just trace the house of Turnus from its start:
Acrisius, Inachus—Mycenae’s heart’s blood.”
She found these words were useless, for Latinus
Was firm. The venom slipped, infuriating,
Into her entrails, seeped all through her body.
Now monstrous visions haunted that poor woman.
Frenzied, she ran amok all through the city,
Like a top flitting under coiling whip blows;
Boys in intent play, in an empty courtyard,
Send it in spacious circles. At the lash,
It rushes on its curving course. The young group
Watches in wonder as the blows inspire
The flying boxwood. No less fiercely driven,
Amata ran straight through the haughty city.
With a sham Bacchus goading her, she dashed
Into the woods, a greater, wilder outrage,
And hid her daughter in the leafy mountains,
To thwart, to steal her marriage to a Trojan.
She roared, “O Bacchus, only you deserve her!
She takes in hand your pliant thyrsus, dances
Around you, grows a lock of hair to give you.”
Word flew; the other mothers caught her passion,
Which drove them from their homes out into new ones,
Hearts flaming, heads and necks bare to the wind.
Some of them filled the sky with shivering howls,
Wore skins, held spear shafts wound with grapevine leaves.
Fevered Amata waved a torch among them
And sang the wedding of her child and Turnus,
Rolling red eyes. She gave a sudden shriek:
“Oh, listen, mothers everywhere in Latium,
If your good hearts still cherish poor Amata,
And if my flouted mother-­rights disturb you,
Unbind your hair, take up these secret rites.”
Allecto used such Bacchic goads to harry
The queen all through the bleak, beast-­haunted forest.
Pleased with this first sharp frenzy, the grim goddess
Who’d wrecked Latinus’ plans and all his household
Didn’t delay but on her dark wings sought
The brave Rutulian’s town (where Danaë,
Driven, they say, by headlong South Winds, founded
A settlement for Argives. It was called
Ardea by the ancients—still a great name;
Its wealth is gone, though). There, in his high palace,
Turnus was sleeping through the black of midnight.
Allecto stripped off her ferocious form
And changed to an old woman: plowed her forehead
With ugly lines, whitened her hair and bound it
With olive twigs and ribbons, to resemble
Calybe, Juno’s priestess at her shrine.
She came before the young man’s eyes and spoke:
“Turnus, you let your striving go for nothing?
You watch your scepter pass to Trojan settlers?
The king denies the bride your blood has paid for.
He wants a foreigner to have his kingdom.
They laugh at you! Take useless risks and scatter
Etruscan lines, for Latium’s peace and safety.
Almighty Juno ordered me to say this
Plainly, as you were resting in the still night.
Up, then, and arm the young men, march them out
To fight. Burn, with their painted ships, the lords
Of Phrygia squatting by your lovely river.
The gods’ great power demands that King Latinus,
Unless he does your will and grants your wedding,
Should find at last what you are like in battle.”
The young man answered, sneering at the prophet:
“The news has not escaped me, as you think:
The fleet has traveled into Tiber’s waters.
I don’t need made-­up panic. Royal Juno
Hasn’t forgotten me.
Your failing and oblivious old age
Torments you pointlessly with these false fears
And prophecies about the clash of kings.
Your task is guarding the gods’ effigies.
Men, who fight wars, will deal with war and peace.”
The speech inflamed Allecto. While still speaking,
The young man felt a sudden terror seize him
And gaped: so many snakes hissed on the Fury,
So monstrous was the sight. He stopped and stammered.
She shoved him back, her flaming eyes assailed him.
Two snakes reared from her head. She made the whips
She brandished hiss, and spoke from foaming lips:
“Just look at how oblivious I am,
With these false fears about the clash of kings.
See! From the deadly sisters’ home I come,
With death and war in hand.”
She spoke, and threw a smoking torch at him,
To lodge its black light in his youthful breast.
Terror crashed through his sleep, and sweat broke out
To cover him and soak him to the bones.
He roared for arms and searched his bed, his rooms
In savage iron-­lust, depraved war frenzy,
And rage above all; as a heap of twigs
Is lit to roar beneath a frothing cauldron;
The water leaps and burns—inside there storms
A smoky river, foam goes burgeoning
Beyond its confines, shooting black steam skyward.
Peace was profaned: he sent his young lieutenants
To King Latinus, ordered arms prepared,
Italy guarded, enemies thrust out.
Latins and Trojans—he could face them both.
He told the gods what he would give for victory.
Rutulians egged each other on to fight.
His fine and graceful youth moved some, and some
His royal bloodline or his glorious warcraft.
While Turnus filled his soldiers’ hearts with fire,
Hell-­winged Allecto, with a new ploy, hurried
Off to the Trojans. Scouting out the shore,
Where handsome, swift, and cunning Iulus hunted,
The hellish virgin struck the dogs with madness.
She tossed a scent they knew before their noses,
To goad them on a deer’s trail. Anguish started
This way, and kindled rustic hearts for war.
There was a splendid stag, with wide-­spread antlers.
Together with his young sons, Tyrrhus, master
Of the king’s herds and keeper of his broad plains,
Had taken it, a suckling then, and reared it.
Silvia, the boys’ sister, lavished care
On the pet, twined its antlers with soft garlands,
Combed it and bathed it in a crystal spring.
It ate its owners’ food, put up with stroking,
And though it roamed the woods, it made its own way
Back to their door, however late at night.
Iulus’ ferocious dogs now started it—
It had strayed far from home and swum upstream
And rested from the heat beneath a green bank.
Ascanius was fired by ambition
And aimed an arrow out of his bent bow.
A god directed his uncertain hand.
The dart twanged out and sang through flanks and belly.
The wounded beast sought refuge in its home.
Moaning and bleeding, limping to the barn,
It filled the buildings with beseeching wails.
Silvia heard, in horror beat her forearms,
And called the hardy country men to help.
In the still woods the vicious Fury hid.
Instantly they were there: one had a charred torch;
The next a club with swollen knots. Rage rummaged
Its weapons out, and Tyrrhus marshaled forces:
From quartering a log of oak with wedges,
He’d turned and seized his ax in panting fury.
Perched on a lookout, the divine fiend saw
More to do. Moving to a barn’s high rooftop,
She sent her hellish voice out through a curved horn—
A shepherd’s call, which set the whole deep forest
Immediately echoing and trembling
Clear to Diana’s lake and the Nar River,
White with its sulfur, and Velinus’ springs.
Mothers in fear pressed children to their breasts.
The sturdy farmers swarmed from everywhere,
Answering the grim trumpet’s call and seizing
Whatever weapons were at hand. The Trojans
Poured from their own gate, to Ascanius’ aid.
Both sides lined up. It was no yokel brawl now
With burnt stakes and hard cudgels, but a contest
Of two-­edged blades; a darkly bristling crop
Of swords stretched far away. Bronze armor flashed,
Struck by the sun; the light shot to the clouds:
As when the surface of the sea begins
To whiten, slowly rising, shooting waves
Higher, until its lowest depths heave skyward.
Now at the front, the eldest son of Tyrrhus,
Young Almo, fell. A hissing arrow struck him
And lodged below his throat, to choke with blood
The thin soft passage of his voice and life breath.
Around him many dead lay; old Galaesus
Had stepped between to plead for peace—most just
And wealthiest Italian of those days:
Five bleating and five lowing herds were driven
Over his soil; a hundred plowshares turned it.
Equally matched, men filled the plain with fighting.
This was the mighty goddess’ pledge: a bloodstain
Starting the war—a first clash—deaths. Allecto
Left Italy and passed through airy heaven
And spoke to Juno haughtily, in triumph:
“Here is your conflict, sealed by dismal war.
Now tell them to be friends, bound by a treaty.
I’ve spattered Trojans with Italian blood.
I’ll do more if you sanction it. My rumors
Will spread the war to nearby towns and kindle
The lust for frenzied Mars. They’ll come to help
From everywhere. I’ll strew the land with arms.”
“Enough deceit and fear for now,” said Juno.
“They’re fighting hand to hand, with solid motives.
Chance offered weapons; fresh blood sullies them.
Venus’ superior son and King Latinus
Can have this as a wedding and a marriage.
The father, though, Olympus’ king, would surely
Not want you wandering at will in heaven.
Get out then. I’ll direct whatever action
Is called for now.” So Saturn’s daughter spoke.
The other raised her wings, which hissed with snakes,
And left the steep sky for her home in hell.
Midway through Italy, beneath high mountains,
Ampsanctus lies, a famous valley, legend
In many lands. Dark forests crowd both sides
With their thick leaves. A torrent in the middle
Crashes through rocks and twists its frothing waters.
They point a fearsome cave out there, where cruel Dis
Breathes from the chinks, and Acheron breaks through
A poisoned pit. The Fury, hateful power,
Slipped in, unburdening the earth and sky.
Now Saturn’s queenly daughter put the last touch
On war. The shepherd’s whole contingent ran
From battle to the town, and brought the dead—
Young Almo and Galaesus with his torn face—
Imploring gods, appealing to Latinus.
To raging murder charges Turnus added
New alarms: Trojans asked to share the kingdom,
Easterners breeding in, himself expelled.
The families of the matrons running wild
Through trackless woods in Bacchic bands now gathered
(Amata’s name had weight) demanding war,
Evil war. Everyone was now possessed;
The omens, the decrees of fate meant nothing.
They avidly besieged Latinus’ palace.
A cliff above the sea, he stood unmoving—
A sea cliff in reverberating storms;
Firm in its bulk it holds, though waves throng roaring
Around it. Crags and frothing boulders moan—
Unshaken, pouring back the battered seaweed.
The old man had no power to defeat
Their blind plans—heartless Juno set things going.
Often he called on gods and empty air:
“Fate wrecks our ship; a whirlwind whips us onward.
Poor things, you’ll make atonement with your blood.
Turnus, your sin will bring harsh punishment.
Too late you’ll pray and try to buy the gods off.
But I’ve earned rest. I’m on the haven’s edge,
And robbed of nothing but a happy death.”
He kept indoors and dropped the reins of state.
There was a ritual in Hesperian Latium,
Which Alban cities afterward kept sacred,
And lofty Rome performs, when war is launched—
Whether against Hyrcanians or Getans
Or Arabs, or if it’s an eastward march
To claim back standards from the Parthians.
There stand twin Gates of War (so they are named),
Held sacred in the dread of savage Mars.
Eternal iron and a hundred bronze bars
Seal them, and Janus is their guardian.
When senators resolve to fight, the consul,
Marked out by Quirinal robe and Gabine belt,
With his own hands throws wide the creaking doors,
And gives the call to war. The fighting men
Follow, and bronze horns blast their harsh assent.
Though ordered to perform this rite, declaring
War on the Trojans through these the gloomy portals,
Father Latinus shrank from touching them.
He fled the hateful task and hid in shadows.
But then the queen of heaven, Saturn’s daughter,
Flew down herself to force the iron war gates
Apart, and pushed until the hinges turned.
Italy, calm and still before, now blazed.
Some looked to march across the plains, some reared
Wildly on dusty mounts. All called for weapons.
Some used thick fat to polish shields and lances,
And others ground their axes sharp on whetstones.
The trumpet thrilled them, hoisted standards thrilled them.
Five mighty cities made their anvils echo:
Proud Tibur, strong Atina, Ardea,
Towered Antemnae, Crustumerium
Hollowed out sturdy helmets and wove shields
From bending wicker, or shaped cuirasses
From bronze, or glossy greaves from pliant silver.
Forgetting their devotion to the plowshare
And sickle, men reforged their fathers’ blades.
Horns blared, the watchword spread—the war had come.
One snatched his helmet on the run from home.
One strained to yoke his neighing team, put on
His shield, gold-­woven breastplate, trusted sword.
Stir my song, Muses, open Helicon.
What kings were roused to war, what armies followed
To fill the plains, what heroes bloomed already
In that propitious soil, what arms grew hot there?
You know it and can tell it, goddesses;
Barely a breath can reach me of the story.
Out of Etruria, Mezentius,
Wild scorner of the gods, first armed his men
And marched, with his son Lausus—there was no one
Handsomer, save for Turnus of Laurentum—
Lausus, horse-­tamer, conqueror of wild things,
Who led a thousand men (what good to him?)
From Caere and deserved more in obeying
His father—he deserved a better father.
Next Aventinus, splendid Hercules’
Splendid child, strutted his prize chariot team.
The Hydra, girdled with a hundred snakes,
His father’s emblem, marked his shield. The priestess
Rhea had brought him to the shores of light
In secret, on the wooded Aventine.
She’d mated with the god, who came as victor
From slaughtered Geryon to Laurentian fields
And bathed his Spanish cows in Tuscan currents.
His son’s men now were armed with spears and fierce pikes
And polished swords and Sabine javelins.
He went on foot himself, a lion’s huge skin—
Dire, matted, bristling, white-­toothed—on his head
And swept around him. Dauntingly he came
Into the palace in the hero’s cloak.
Twin brothers then left Tibur’s walls (a third
Brother, Tiburtus, gave their clan its name):
Catillus and keen Coras, youthful Argives,
Ran at the front, where spears and arrows swarmed—
As cloud-­born Centaurs leave some looming peak
To dash down Homole or snowy Othrys
At great speed; massive forest yields a path;
Crashing, the underbrush gives way to them.
Caeculus too was there, Praeneste’s founder,
In lasting legend Vulcan’s royal child
Born among herds and found beside a hearth.
An army came with him, from far-­flung farms
At high Praeneste, Juno’s Gabian
Fields, the cold Anio’s banks, the Hernici’s
Stream-­sprinkled rocks. Some, rich Anagnia nurtured,
Some, Father Amasenus’ river. Not all
Had armor or loud chariots or shields.
Most of the men were slingers of pale lead;
Others waved two spears; tawny caps of wolf fur
Covered their heads. With nothing on their left feet,
And crudely made right boots, they strode along.
Messapus, tamer of horses, son of Neptune—
Guarded by heaven’s will from sword and fire—
Abruptly called to arms tribes long inactive,
Armies unused to war, and drew his own sword.
Fescennia’s fort, Falisci-­on-­the-­Plain,
Soracte’s peaks, Flavinian fields, Ciminus’
Mountain and lake, Capena’s groves all sent them:
Marching in numbered ranks, they sang their king,
Like snowy swans among the flowing clouds,
On their way back from feeding, pouring sweet songs
From their long necks to make the Asian marsh
And river ring far off.
No one would think bronze battle lines were massing
From the great throng, but that a soaring, hoarse cloud
Of birds swarmed from the ocean to the shore.
Clausus, of ancient Sabine stock, led forward
A huge force (he was such a force, alone;
It was his Claudian clan that spread to Latium
After the Sabines gained a share in Rome):
Old Quirites, Amiternans, the whole force
From olive-­rich Mutusca and Erutum;
Troops from Velinus country, walled Nomentum,
Tetrica’s rough cliffs and Severus Mountain,
Casperia, Foruli, Himella’s stream, cold Nursia;
Some drank out of the Fabaris and Tiber;
Ortinian horsemen came, whole Latin towns,
And those whose home the Allia—cursed name—passes:
As many as the glittering Libyan waves,
When cruel Orion dips in winter seas;
As many as the wheat ears scorched by spring sun
On Lycia’s fields of gold, or Hermus’ plains.
Shields sounded, and the earth was stunned with tramping.
Halaesus, Agamemnon’s crony, hateful
To Troy, now yoked his chariot, rushed a thousand
Fierce clans to Turnus’ side, hoers of vineyards
In fertile Massica. Auruncan lords
Swept men from high hills. Sidicinian plains,
Cales, shallow Volturnus’ banks sent others.
Savage Saticulans and a contingent
Of Oscans brought familiar polished spears
To throw with pliant cords, left-­handed shields,
And curving swords for fighting at close quarters.
My poem will not pass over Oebalus
In silence: Telon in old age begat him
On the nymph Sebethis. In Capreae
He ruled the Teleboae, but his son
Fretted there. To the broad Sarrastian lands,
He spread his realm, to plains the Sarnus waters,
To Rufrae, Batulum, Celemna’s farmers,
To apple land beneath Abella’s walls.
His men, like Germans, carried spears with barbs.
Their heads were covered with the bark of cork trees.
Their small shields flashed with bronze, their swords with gold.
Ufens was sent to war from highland Nersae.
His fame was great, his war achievements splendid,
His barbarous Aequiculans addicted
To hunting in the woods. They lived on hard soil,
Plowed wearing armor, constantly collected
Fresh loot, and liked to live on what they’d taken.
From the Marruvian people valiant Umbro
The priest came also, sent by King Archippus.
Lush olive leaves festooned the warrior’s helmet.
There was no breed of poison-­breathing viper
He couldn’t put to sleep with charms and stroking.
He soothed their rage and remedied their bites,
And yet he couldn’t cure a Trojan spear strike.
Sleep-­bringing spells and herbs the Marsians
Find in their hills were useless for the wound,
Glassy-­waved Fucinus, Angitian woods,
The clear pools wept for him.
Virbius marched there too, Hippolytus’
Glorious child, Aricia’s noble nursling,
Raised in Egeria’s grove, around the moist shores
Where sumptuous gifts can win Diana’s favor.
His cunning stepmother and bolting horses
Had torn Hippolytus apart: he paid
In blood the price his father claimed; Diana,
It’s said, who loved him, used the Healer’s herbs
To make him rise again to starry heaven.
Then the almighty father, in his anger
At a mortal brought from hell to light and life,
Struck Phoebus’ son and blasted to the Styx
The one who’d found this potent remedy.
But kind Diana gave Hippolytus
A refuge in the nymph Egeria’s woodland,
To spend his life obscurely, with a new name,
Virbius, in the woods of Italy.
And so the goddess’ sacred grove and temple
Bars hard-­hooved horses like the team that wrecked
His chariot, when sea-­beasts panicked them.
His son, however, drove an eager pair
Over the flat plain, hurtling into war.
Turnus moved back and forth along the front,
Beautiful, armed, a head above the others.
His triple-­plumed high helmet reared the emblem
Of a Chimera, spewing flames of Etna:
Her ruinous breath grew wilder, her roar louder
As battle grew more brutal and blood flowed.
Io in gold was blazoned on his smooth shield—
A rough-­haired, butting cow. Such detail! Argus
Guarded her, and her father, Inachus,
Poured his stream from a silver urn. Behind,
Foot soldiers, shields, ranks packed the plain: young Argives,
Auruncans and Rutulians, primeval
Sicanians, a Sacranian array,
Labicians who carried painted bucklers;
And men who plowed the uplands of the Tiber,
Numicus’ holy shore, Rutulian hills,
And Circe’s ridge—domains of Jove of Anxur
And of Feronia, glad in her green grove;
Troops from Satura’s black swamp, and the valley
Cold Ufens threads, to duck into the sea.
Last came Camilla of the Volsci,
Leading a cavalry that bloomed with bronze.
A female warrior, stranger to Minerva’s
Tasks and the distaff, though she was a girl,
She endured combat and outran the wind.
She could have skimmed the tips of standing grain
Over a field and spared the tender heads,
Or glided clear across the swelling ocean
And kept her swift feet dry above the surface.
Men poured from fields and matrons out of houses
To gaze on her in wonder as she rode.
They gaped, astonished at the royal splendor
Of purple on smooth shoulders, the gold hair clasp—
The Lycian quiver hanging at her back,
The shepherd’s staff of myrtle, tipped with iron.
