As soon as Turnus saw the Latins shattered,
And felt their stares demand he keep his pledge,
His spirit filled with unrelenting flame—
As on the plains of Punic Africa
A lion wounded in the breast by hunters
Relishes going into war at last,
Tosses his mane and snaps the planted spear,
Unflinching, roaring with his bloody mouth.
So Turnus’ savagery was set alight.
In wild disorder he addressed the king:
“I’m ready now. Why should Aeneas’ cowards
Renege on their agreement? I’ll go face him.
Father, bring offerings, and set the terms.
I’ll send the Trojans (on the run from Asia)
To hell, before a Latin audience,
One sword refuting all our shame, or else
We’ll be his slaves, Lavinia his bride.”
Latinus answered, with his heart made quiet:
“Indomitable young man, your fierce courage
Must weigh against my heavy obligation
To take great care in looking to the future.
You have your father Daunus’ realm. You’ve captured
Many towns. I have gold and open hands.
Other unmarried girls, with proper bloodlines,
Live throughout Latium. Let me be straightforward.
I’ll use harsh words, but you must take them in.
My child was not for any former suitor:
Divine and human prophets made this clear.
Our common blood, my love for you, the tears
Of my poor wife prevailed: I broke all bonds,
Seized my son’s new bride, started evil war.
Since then, you see what dogs me, and how great
Your hardships are, above all. Two huge battles
Are lost; this city scarcely lets us guard
Italy’s hopes. Our blood still warms the Tiber;
Our bones have turned these miles of grasslands white.
What madness keeps me changing and retreating?
If you were killed, I would adopt these allies.
Shouldn’t I end the conflict now and spare you?
Your own Rutulian kin—all Italy—
What will they say if (fate forbid!) I lure you
To death, because you’re chasing this alliance?
Think of war’s risks, think of your poor old father
Grieving far off in Ardea, his city.”
These words did nothing to allay his passion;
The treatment only made the sickness worse.
But when he could, he spoke, “Excellent father,
It would be kinder not to be concerned.
Just let me make my bargain: life for glory.
And yet the spears I throw are not so feeble.
The wounds that I inflict don’t fail to bleed.
He’ll have no goddess-­mother there to veil
His flight in female clouds and empty shadows.”
The queen burst into tears, in deadly panic,
And held her child’s fierce suitor in her arms.
“If you regard me and these tears at all,
Turnus (my only hope now, my one solace
In old age, since Latinus’ rule and honor,
And our whole tottering house, are on your shoulders),
Tell me you won’t fight hand to hand with Trojans.
I have a stake in how this combat ends.
Along with you, I’ll leave this hateful daylight,
No captive of my son-­in-­law Aeneas.”
Lavinia was there and heard her mother.
The tears came pouring down her flaming cheeks,
Dashing across the heat of crimson blushes.
Indian ivory purple dye has wounded,
Or roses bunched with lilies, lending shadows
Of red—these were the colors on the girl’s face.
He stared, confused by love—which stoked his passion
To fight—and spoke a few words to Amata:
“Mother, I plead with you, don’t let the omen
That sends me to the grisly clash of Mars
Be tears. I am not free to put off death.
Idmon, go now, displease the Phrygian tyrant
With these words: when tomorrow’s dawn first rises,
Blushing and driving her red chariot,
He must not lead his forces out: both armies
Can down their arms and let his blood or mine
End this. That’s how we’ll court Lavinia.”
He hurried back inside. Where were his horses?
He smiled to see their whinnying impatience.
Orithyia’s superb gifts to Pilumnus
Were swifter than the wind, whiter than snow.
Their drivers fussed around them busily,
Slapping their chests and combing their long manes.
Turnus strapped on a breastplate, gold with scales
Of pale bronze, set his shield for action, took up
His helmet with its red crests in their sockets,
And then—forged by the fire god for his father,
Daunus, and tempered in Styx’ stream—his sword.
On a huge column in the central hall
Leaned a strong spear, won from Auruncan Actor.
He seized and clenched it, shook and brandished it,
And cried, “My faithful servant, never shirking,
The time has come. Great Actor carried you,
And now it’s Turnus. Let me throw him down,
Rip off his corselet with my brawny hand
And smear dust over Phrygian eunuch hair,
Sodden with myrrh and crimped with iron tongs.”
His eyes flashed as these rages hounded him;
His face, on fire all over, threw off sparks:
As an enraged bull bellows fearsomely,
And tries to vent his fury with his horns—
Charging against a tree trunk, jabbing wind—
And kicks up sand in prelude to the battle.
Equally fierce, in armor from his mother,
Aeneas roused his soul to martial rage,
Glad of the offer that would end the conflict.
Now he assured his men and anxious Iulus
Of destiny, and sent to King Latinus
A firm reply that set the terms for peace.
The dawn’s first glow spread on the mountaintops
As the Sun’s chariot rose from the ocean,
His horses’ nostrils flaring, breathing light.
Beneath the splendid city’s walls, Rutulians
And Trojans measured out the fighting ground
And in the center piled up sod for altars
To common gods. Some men, in sacred garlands
And hooded by their cloaks, brought fire and water.
In massive columns, the Ausonian army
Poured from the gate. The Trojans and Etruscans
Streamed from their camp, with all their varied weapons,
As if grim Mars himself had summoned them.
The captains flew among them, flaunting gold
And purple gear: Assaracus’ descendant
Mnestheus was there, and brave Asilas;
Messapus too, Neptune’s horse-­taming offspring.
Each, at the signal, fell into his place,
Planted his spear and leaned his shield against it.
Eager to see, mothers, the unarmed commons,
And weak old men came pouring out to fill
Towers and roofs, or stood above high gateways.
Juno was watching from the Alban hilltop
(Not famous yet—it wasn’t even named).
She saw the field and both the armies, Trojan,
Laurentian, and the city of Latinus.
Now she addressed a fellow deity,
Sister of Turnus, who ruled sounding rivers
And lakes (the honor that the king of heaven
Granted because he’d raped the virgin girl).
“Cherished nymph, glory of the streams, you know
I favor you above all girls in Latium
Who’ve been with willful Jove and not enjoyed it.
I’ve gladly let you have your place in heaven.
Learn of the grief in store, but don’t blame me.
With Fate and Fortune letting Latium prosper,
I shielded Turnus and your city’s walls.
But now I see the youth outmatched by fate.
An angry force draws near and brings his ending.
I cannot watch them make a pact or fight.
Would you dare help your brother at close quarters?
You should. Poor things, it still might turn out better.”
At once, Juturna’s face was streaming tears.
Repeatedly she struck her handsome breast.
“This is no time to cry,” said Saturn’s daughter.
“Run to your brother, save him, find a way,
Or stir up war and break the truce they’ve made.
I will support you.” But this goading speech
Left the girl still in doubt, confused and stricken.
Now the kings came. Latinus’ chariot
Was four-­horsed, massive; and around his temples
Shone twelve gold rays, the emblem of the Sun,
His ancestor, while Turnus brandished two spears
With broad heads as he drove his two white horses.
Aeneas, father of the Roman race,
His shield a star, his armor from divine hands,
Marched from his camp beside Ascanius,
Rome’s second hope. A priest in pure white robes
Brought out a piglet and an unshorn sheep
And made them stand before the flaming altar.
The leaders faced the rising sun. They sprinkled
Salted grain, notched the foreheads of the victims,
And poured out their libations on the altars.
Faithful Aeneas drew his sword and swore:
“I call the Sun to witness, and this land
For which I have endured so many hardships;
And the almighty father and his consort—
May she be kinder now, I pray—and great Mars,
Lord who twists every war beneath his power;
Rivers and springs, and everything we worship
In the sky’s heights and in the blue of ocean:
If Turnus the Italian wins, we losers
Must migrate to the city of Evander,
Iulus will cede this land, Aeneas’ people
Will not renew the war against this city.
If in this combat Victory sides with me
(I think it will; may the gods’ power confirm this),
I will not make the Trojans overlords
Or claim the throne. With neither race the loser,
We’ll make a lasting bond, on equal terms.
I’ll bring our rites and gods in. My wife’s father,
Latinus, can still reign and keep his army
While Trojans build my town, Lavinium.”
Aeneas had been first. Latinus followed,
His eyes on heaven, right hand to the stars.
“Aeneas, I too swear by earth, sea, stars,
Latona’s twins, and Janus with two faces,
The power of gods below, and cruel Dis’ temples.
Father, whose lightning bolt welds treaties, hear me:
I touch the altars; by the fire between us,
And by the gods, our race won’t break this treaty,
Whatever the result. No force will turn me
Aside from this, though seas may flood the land
In chaos, heaven melt its way to hell;
As surely as this scepter”—in his right hand—
“Won’t send out shoots with tender shading leaves
Now that it’s severed from its mother earth
And had its boughs and foliage stripped away—
It was a tree; a craftsman now has wrapped it
In handsome bronze for Latin kings to carry.”
So they affirmed the terms before the nobles.
And now they cut the consecrated throats
Above the flame, pulled out the throbbing guts,
And piled the altars with the laden platters.
All along, the Rutulians thought the fight
Unfair, which stirred a welter of emotions,
Worse now that they could see themselves outmatched,
Worse still when Turnus silently stepped forward
With downcast eyes to pray before the altar,
His face so young, his youthful form so pale.
Juturna, Turnus’ sister, sensed the murmurs
Were growing, and the crowd confused and shaken.
She assumed Camers’ form (his ancestry
Was splendid, and his father known for courage,
And he himself the cutting edge of battle)
And sowed all sorts of rumors through the army—
She knew what she was doing—and harangued it:
“Rutulians, what’s this shameful sacrifice
Of one man? Aren’t we all a match for them?
Look at how few there are—Arcadians, Trojans,
And Tuscans, Turnus’ fated enemies.
Would half of us have one opponent each?
Turnus will have the same immortal glory
As gods themselves, to whom he’s vowed his life.
We’ll lose our native land, we’ll be enslaved,
Sitting here dawdling on the battlefield!”
The fire these words set in the soldiers’ hearts
Grew and grew. Mutters snaked across the ranks.
Latins, Laurentians changed, and even those
Who just before had hoped for peace and safety
Now longed for arms, prayed for the truce to break,
Wringing their hearts for Turnus’ unjust lot.
More forcefully, Juturna gave a sign
In the sky’s heights, of just the character
To be misread and muddle the Italians:
Jove’s tawny eagle chased a shrieking mob
Of shore birds in the ruddy sky—a winged rout—
And then went swooping to the waves and captured
The leader of the swans in his cruel talons,
Transfixing the Italians. But the flock
Now rallied with a cry—amazing sight.
The sky was darkened by their cloud of wings
As they pursued their enemy. The eagle,
Harried and weighed down, let the plunder fall
Into the stream and fled among the clouds—
An omen the Rutulians loudly hailed,
Stirring to fight. Tolumnius the augur
Spoke first: “This is the thing I often prayed for,
The gods’ sign—welcome! Follow me to battle,
Poor people, terrorized by this invader,
Like weak birds, as he sacks your coasts—the outrage!
He’ll hoist his sails to get away, a long voyage.
With a united purpose, close your ranks
And fight to save the prince who’s taken from you.”
Now he ran forward toward the enemy,
Flinging a spear. The well-­aimed cornel shaft
Hissed through the air. A shout rose instantly
From every part of the excited crowd.
The spear flew toward the nine resplendent sons
A single virtuous Etruscan wife
Had given to Arcadian Gylippus.
It struck one in the waist (right at the pin
That held the chafing sword belt at the belly)—
A very handsome youth with shining armor—
Passed through his ribs and pitched him on the sand.
The brave line of his brothers, fired with grief,
Drew swords and took up spears, attacking blindly.
The ranks of the Laurentians dashed against them.
The answer was a flood of Agyllines,
Trojans, Arcadians in painted armor,
All with one passion: settling this with war.
They tore apart the altars—while a wild storm,
A ruthless rain of iron filled the sky—
And snatched the bowls and braziers. King Latinus
Fled with his routed gods. The truce was broken.
Men seized the reins of chariots, or vaulted
Onto their mounts and menaced with drawn swords.
Eager to spoil the truce, Messapus charged
Aulestes the Etruscan, who wore emblems
Of kingship. As the poor man backed away,
He hit an altar, which he tumbled over
Onto his head. Excitedly, Messapus
Galloped up with his spear. The king was pleading.
The rider loomed and struck and jeered. “He’s finished—
A better offering for the gods above.”
Italians ran to strip the still-­warm body.
From that same altar Corynaeus snatched
Lit wood, and as Ebysus lunged for him,
Thrust the flame in his face. His giant beard
Blazed with a stinging stench, and the attacker
Now grabbed his dazed opponent by the hair,
Forced him down, kneeling hard, and pierced his side
With the unyielding sword. The shepherd Alsus
Dashed through flung spears, but Podalirius
Pursued him with a sword; now his opponent
Lifted an ax in turn and split his brow
And chin, and spattered gore across his armor.
A sleep of iron pressed his eyelids down,
And left them closed for an eternal night.
Righteous Aeneas stood bareheaded, lifting
An unarmed hand and shouting to his troops:
“Why are you racing to a brawl again?
Hold in your rage: we’ve ratified our terms,
So let me keep them—I must fight alone.
Don’t be afraid; my sword will seal this treaty.
These rites have pledged that Turnus is for me.”
The warrior was still haranguing loudly,
When a winged arrow hissed its way to him—
But which hand sent it flying is unknown.
Did chance or did a god bring the Rutulians
Such glory? This great exploit’s fame was stifled.
Nobody boasted that he’d shot Aeneas.
Hope flared up hot in Turnus when he saw
Aeneas falling back, his captains panicked.
He called for arms and horses, proudly vaulted
Into his chariot and grabbed the reins.
Many strong men died where he flew along.
Others he rolled away half-­dead, he trampled
Whole ranks, he poured their own spears on the routed.
As, by the chilly Hebrus, bloody Mars
Is stirred to clash his shield and storm to war,
Giving his team free rein to skim the plains
Faster than South and West Winds, and their hoofbeats
Make farthest Thrace groan, and the god’s retainers—
Treachery, Rage, and black Fear—pound beside him:
So wildly Turnus drove his steaming horses.
They capered on the pitiable carnage,
Spattering blood-­dew with their tearing hooves;
The sand they stamped across was mixed with gore.
Hand to hand, he killed Thamyrus and Pholus,
Sthenelus with a distant shot—like Glaucus
And Lades, raised by Imbrasus, their father,
In Lycia and given matching armor
For sparring or out-­galloping the wind.
Elsewhere Eumedes plunged in. He possessed
His grandsire’s name, but Dolon’s strength and spirit:
His father, hero of the bygone war,
Had boldly named Achilles’ chariot
To be his prize for spying on the Greek camp.
But Diomedes gave a different prize,
Which kept him from aspiring to those horses.
Now Turnus saw the son far off, exposed,
Chased him the whole way with a javelin,
Then leapt out of his chariot to straddle
The fallen dying man. He stamped his neck down
And wrenched the shining sword from his right hand
To sink it in his throat, and taunted him:
“Trojan, here’s Western ground for you to conquer:
Measure it with your body, be rewarded
For daring to attack me. Look, your walls grow!”
His spear sent Asbytes with him, and Dares,
Chloreus, Sybaris, Thersilochus,
Thymoetes, whom his bucking horse had thrown.
Edonian north winds that howl across
The deep Aegean, driving winds to shore,
Gales that swoop down and drive the clouds from heaven
Were like the path that Turnus cut; the columns
And battle lines were turning in a flood.
His soaring plume was pulsing in the wind.
Phegeus, keen to stop his roaring onrush,
Dove straight into his way and yanked aside
The foam-­soaked bridles of his whipped-­up horses.
While he hung dragging from the yoke, his shield
Slipped, a spear struck him, and it penetrated
The breastplate with its double mesh and grazed him.
He faced his enemy still, heaved up his shield,
And tried to make some headway with his sword—
The hurtling whirling wheel propelled him headlong,
And he went sprawling. Turnus went to him.
The helmet left the neck exposed. He took
The head, and left the body in the sand.
These victories sowing death, Mnestheus
And staunch Achates, with Ascanius,
Helped back to camp Aeneas, smeared in gore,
His long spear propping every other step.
The arrow had snapped off. He gouged the wound,
Raging: the most direct way was a broadsword
To cut down where the point hid and allow him
To go back into battle. But the son of Iasus, Iapyx, came; Apollo
Had loved him painfully, beyond all others,
And gladly offered all his skills and powers:
His lyre and prophecy, and his swift arrows.
But to prolong his dying father’s life,
He chose to learn the properties of herbs
And humble, unheroic arts of healing.
Aeneas seethed in pain, propped on his huge spear
Among the warrior crowd with grieving Iulus,
But their tears didn’t move him. Old Iapyx,
His robe hitched up in the physicians’ manner,
Made many anxious trials with herbs of Phoebus—
Applied with no result, as when he prodded
The point or took it in his gripping forceps.
No route proved lucky, and his patron god
Didn’t come help. Across the plain, cruel horror
Swelled, and disaster neared. Dust filled the sky,
Horsemen came swooping in, and swarms of arrows
Reached the camp’s heart. Grim shouts went heavenward,
As young men fought and died in ruthless battle.
Venus the mother, shaken by her child’s pain—
Unfair!—picked dittany in Cretan Ida.
This is an herb with trailing purple flowers
And downy leaves, familiar to wild goats
For browsing when they’re wounded by an arrow.
Venus, veiled in a dark cloud, brought it down
And steeped the secret remedy in water
A bright bowl held. She sprinkled in ambrosia
And panacea with its pleasant fragrance.
The moment old Iapyx bathed the wound,
The pain was gone, though he did not know why;
The blood dried from the bottom of the lesion;
The arrow yielded to his hand—unforced,
It dropped out, and the body’s weakness vanished.
Iapyx took the lead, goaded the others:
“Why are you standing there? Quick, get his weapons!
It was no human power, no skill of mine
That saved your life, Aeneas. Someone greater
Than me is sending you to greater exploits.”
Hungry to fight, he’d strapped on both gold greaves
Already. Restively, he shook his spear.
His shield now fitted to his side, his cuirass
Around his trunk, he gave Ascanius
A steel embrace and kissed him through the visor.
“Learn courage and true toil from me, my boy—
And Fortune’s ways from others. I’ll protect you
This time, and lead you where the great rewards are.
Do keep in mind, as you mature, the models
From your own stock: be driven by Aeneas
Your father, and your uncle Hector too.”
He loomed, shook his huge spear, rushed from the gates;
With him, Antheus and Mnestheus
Took a massed force. The men poured out and emptied
The crowded camp, and soon the field was muddled
With blinding dust, jolted and roiled with tramping.
Turnus, up on the earthwork, saw them coming.
Blood chilled in the Italians as they saw.
Juturna was the first among the Latins
To recognize the sound, and she retreated.
Aeneas swept the deadly line with him
Across the plain. As storm clouds cross the sea
And block the sun (terror of wretched farmers,
Who, long before the start, foretell the downfall
Of trees, crops massacred, the whole land ruined),
While winds soar on and bring the sound to land:
So the Rhoeteian leader led his army
At his opponents, all formations joining
In one. Thymbraeus killed immense Osiris;
Mnestheus, Arcetius; Achates,
Epulo; Gyas, Ufens; then the augur
Tolumnius—who’d taken that first shot.
A shout rose skyward. Now it was Rutulians
In dust-­choked flight across the battlefield.
Aeneas didn’t stoop to bring them down
In death with duels on foot or with pursuit
Of men with spears. He kept at Turnus’ back
Through the murk, yelling challenges at Turnus.
The warrior girl Juturna, in alarm,
Toppled Metiscus, who was Turnus’ driver,
Over the shaft and left him far behind,
Taking his place to steer with rippling reins—
Disguised as him, down to his voice and weapons.
Like a black swallow flying through the mansion
Of a rich man, across his lofty halls,
Gathering scraps to bring her prattling brood,
Calling in empty porticoes and circling
The cisterns: so Juturna’s chariot
Sped through the hostile army. Everywhere
She made a show of her exultant brother—
But kept him far away from any fighting.
Aeneas tracked him on a winding path
Toward confrontation, calling through the remnants
Of battle lines. He’d glimpse his enemy
And fight to overtake the fleeing team:
Juturna always turned the chariot.
What should he do? As on chaotic currents,
His purposes were pulled conflicting ways.
Messapus happened to be carrying
Two pliant iron-­pointed spears. He ran up,
Aimed one and hurled it for a certain strike.
Behind his shield, Aeneas dropped to one knee,
But when the speeding spear passed over him,
It grazed the helmet, ripping off the plume.
His anger flared up at the sneak attack.
When he saw Turnus’ chariot receding,
He called on Jove, the broken truce’s altars,
And plunged straight in—and now Mars favored him.
He launched a slaughter—horrifying, cruel,
And random—and it gave his rage free rein.
What god will sing me such pain—deaths of all kinds
For chiefs whom Turnus and the Trojan hero
Drove back and forth in turn across the plain?
Jupiter, was it your decree, this clash
Of nations that would later live as friends?
Where Trojans rushing in first met resistance
Aeneas killed Rutulian Sucro, deftly
Driving his cruel sword through the fence of ribs
Into his side—this wound that kills the fastest.
Turnus unhorsed Amycus and Diores,
Brothers, and then he dealt with them on foot,
One with a javelin, one with a sword,
And hung his chariot with their bleeding heads.
Aeneas in one clash slew brave Cethegus,
Talos and Tanaïs; then sad Onites,
Peridia’s child, a Theban; Turnus killed
Two brothers from Apollo’s Lycia:
Menoetes too, futile in hating war:
A poor Arcadian, adept at fishing
The teeming streams at Lerna—not at serving
Powerful men. His father sowed hired ground.
A fire is launched into a withered forest
From either side, to set the bay trees crackling;
Two frothy rivers crash from mountain heights
And hurry to the seas, each ravaging
Its path: so Turnus and Aeneas swept
The battlefield with so much energy.
Their rage swelled as it never had; their hearts burst,
Unconquered. They attacked with all their strength.
Murranus boasted of his ancient clan
And claimed a pure descent from Latin kings.
Aeneas’ whirling giant boulder dashed him
Onto the ground. The wheels rolled him ahead
Under the reins and yoke. Battering hooves
Trampled the man—his horses didn’t know him.
Hyllus charged in untrammeled fury; Turnus
Answered him with a spear to his gold helmet.
It pierced the forehead, lodging in his brain.
Cretheus, bravest of the Greeks, was no match
For Turnus. When Aeneas came, Cupencus
Could find no safety in his gods. The poor man
Gained just a short delay from his bronze shield.
Laurentian fields saw your death, Aeolus:
Stretched on your back, you covered no small space,
Though the Greek phalanx couldn’t bring you down—
Achilles either, ending Priam’s reign.
Your walls were at Lyrnesus, under Ida:
Your finish line was here, your tomb this ground.
All the lines turned to fight now—Latins, Trojans:
Mnestheus, keen Serestus, and Messapus
(Tamer of horses), brave Asilas, Tuscans
Drawn up, Arcadian horsemen of Evander—
Each struggling on his own, with all his strength;
No rest, no pause in the prodigious fight.
Aeneas’ lovely mother prompted him
To make a quick deployment to the walls
And stun the Latins with a new disaster.
While tracking Turnus through the hostile lines,
And looking all around, he saw the city
Peaceful—untouched by all the strife. A vision
Of fuller battle jolted him. He called
Mnestheus, Sergestus, brave Serestus,
His captains, climbed a mound, and made a speech.
His army hurried in to crowd around him,
And listened with their shields and spears still hoisted:
“Obey, and don’t waste time. Jove’s on our side.
It’s a quick change of plans, but don’t hang back.
Unless the guilty town Latinus rules
Accepts our terms and comes beneath our yoke,
I’ll raze its smoking rooftops to the ground—
Unless I ought to wait till Turnus chooses
To fight with me and lose a second time.
Trojans, this evil war is his creation.
Bring torches, quick! Let flames enforce our treaty.”
Now all his forces raced to the attack
And in a massive wedge made for the walls.
Ladders and fire suddenly appeared.
Men scattered to the gates and cut the guards down,
Or made the sky dark with their hurtling weapons.
Aeneas at the front, below the ramparts,
Shouted, stretched out his hand, accused Latinus,
And called the gods to witness: he was forced
To war again—a second pact was broken.
The frightened people of the town were wrangling:
Some called to have the gates flung open, Trojans
Let in, the king dragged to the ramparts. Others
Brought arms, put up a fight—as when a shepherd
Tracks home a swarm of bees back to their cliff,
And fills their pumice crannies with sharp smoke,
Making them roil around in their wax quarters,
In terror and loud-­buzzing, sharpened rage;
A black reek billows through their home; inside,
It’s whirring shrilly as the smoke pours out.
A new blow to the tortured Latins shook
The city to the ground with grief. The queen
Looked from her rooms at the encroach, the walls
Attacked, the fire flying to the rooftops—
No Turnus, no Rutulian counterforce.
The wretched woman thought the youth had died,
And maddened by the sudden agony,
She cried she was to blame for these disasters,
And babbled in the frenzy of her grief.
Prepared to die, she ripped her purple robe
And hung a cruel noose from a lofty beam.
News of this great loss reached the Latin women.
Lavinia tore her bud-­bright hair and scratched
Her cheeks, while those around her raved with horror.
The sound of mourning echoed in the palace.
The tragic story traveled through the city,
Spreading despair. Latinus’ clothes were torn,
His white hair smeared with dust. The suicide
And the town’s downfall stunned him. He kept blaming
Himself: he hadn’t readily accepted
Trojan Aeneas as his son-­in-­law.
The warrior Turnus, at the field’s far side,
Was chasing a few stragglers, slowing down,
His pleasure in his horses’ onslaughts fading,
When the wind carried him the sound of shouting,
Signal of some new horror. The grim roar
Of the town’s turmoil fell on his keen ears.
“What is this monstrous loss that shakes the walls?
Why is this uproar flooding from the city?”
He pulled his reins and stopped, dazed with alarm.
His sister, though—she steered the chariot,
Looking just like Metiscus, Turnus’ driver—
Came back with this: “Let’s chase the sons of Troy here.
We’ve started winning, and the road lies open.
Others can shield their homes, but while Aeneas
Is pressuring Italians, let’s hurl death
At Trojans in their turn; you’ll leave this place
With no less honor, and no fewer killed.”
Turnus replied:
“Sister, I knew you ever since you ruined
The truce, and threw yourself into the war.
Why bother now to hide your holy presence?
Who sent you from Olympus on this mission—
To see your hapless brother’s brutal death?
What can I do? What stroke of luck could save me?
Murranus died—I saw, he called to me;
No one still living is a dearer friend:
A massive wound brought down his massive body.
Poor Ufens fell, so didn’t see my shame.
The Trojans have his weapons and his corpse.
Should I give up and let them raze the town,
And not put Drances’ insults to the sword?
And will this country see me run away?
Is death so terrible? Spirits below,
Bless me! The gods above have turned away.
My soul descends untouched by cowardice.
I’m worthy of my splendid ancestors.”
A horse came dashing, foaming at the mouth,
Through ranks of enemies and brought him Saces,
Wounded across the face, entreating Turnus:
“Have mercy on your people—you’re our last hope.
Aeneas, in the thunder of his onslaught,
Brings ruin to the towers of Italy.
Torches fly to the roofs already. Latium
Now looks to you. The king himself, Latinus,
Doesn’t know who his son is, or what treaty
Binds him; your queen, your staunch friend, killed herself,
Fled the light, terrified. Before the gate,
Only Messapus and the fierce Atinas
Hold our line—though around them stand close ranks
With swords that bristle like an iron wheat field—
And here you drive around on empty grass.”
Turnus was stunned to hear of these reversals.
He stood and stared in silence. In one heart
Surged endless shame, madness infused with grief,
Love spurred by fury, and the pride of courage.
Clouds scattered from his mind, though, and that moment
He turned his burning wide eyes toward the walls,
Glared at the city from his chariot.
The flames were rolling up through every story,
A skyward stretch of waves that seized the tower—
Which he himself had raised, a compact network
Of beams, with wheels beneath, and lofty gangways.
“Sister, now fate has won. Don’t hold me back.
Let’s go where god and brutal Fortune call us:
I am resolved to fight Aeneas, suffer
Anything, die. You’ll see no more dishonor
In me. Grant me my final frenzy now.”
He vaulted from the chariot and burst
Straight through the hostile ranks and clouds of spears
At a dead run, deserting his sad sister,
Like a rock plunging from a mountaintop,
Torn free by wind, or by a scouring rainstorm,
Or loosening and undermining years;
Headlong, unstoppable, it speeds along,
Bouncing, and rolling with it trees and herds
And men. So through the scattered forces Turnus
Rushed to the city walls, where blood had drenched
The earth deep down, and spears sang through the air.
He waved his arm, protesting, bellowing:
“Rutulians, stop! Put down your weapons, Latins!
Whatever fortune brings is mine. I’ll pay
For the spoiled truce and settle this—it’s fairer.”
They all stepped back and made a space between them.
Father Aeneas heard the name of Turnus
And left the ramparts, left the city’s towers,
Broke off all action, threw off all delay
In joy, and clashed his arms with mighty noise,
Towering like a mountain—Athos, Eryx,
Or Father Apennine, who relishes
Rattling his oaks and rearing his white head.
Rutulians, Latins, Trojans all together,
Those on the high walls, those below who worked
Battering rams, turned avidly to look,
Laying down arms. Even Latinus gaped
As the two giant heroes came together
To fight it out—though born a world apart.
Once on the open ground, they started forward,
Running, and launched their spears across the distance,
Then plunged in hand to hand, their bronze shields ringing.
The earth groaned. Now their swords struck, and the blows
Multiplied, in the thick of chance and courage.
As on Taburnus’ heights or Sila’s vast slopes,
Two bulls meet in a savage clash of horns;
The herdsmen back away from them, the herd
Stands mute in fear, the heifers wonder which
Will rule the woods—which will the herds all follow?
Brutally, they converge, exchanging wounds,
Straining their horns home; down their necks and shoulders
Blood washes, groans re-­echo through the glade:
Trojan Aeneas met the Daunian hero
With that much force. The clang of shields filled heaven.
Now Jove himself held up a pair of scales,
Evenly balanced, for the pair of fates:
Who was condemned? Which side would death weigh down?
Seeing a safe chance, Turnus darted forward,
Lifted his sword, and struck with all his strength.
Trojans and frightened Latins shouted. Both lines
Juddered—and then the treacherous sword broke,
Deserting its fierce master as it landed.
He saw the strange bare hilt. He was unarmed,
And ran—he had to—faster than the East Wind.
Mounting behind his team, they say, and bolting
To battle, he had snatched his charioteer
Metiscus’ sword, and left behind his father’s.
This served him well in scattering the Trojans,
But when it fell on Vulcan’s holy weapons,
The mortal blade, brittle as ice, was shattered.
Its pieces glittered on the tawny sand.
Turnus sought frantically for some way out
Across the plain, and wove erratic circles,
Since Trojans pressed around him, and a swamp
Blocked one side, and the looming walls the other.
Aeneas kept up, though the arrow wound
Hampered and slowed him. Seething, step by step,
He harried, right behind his cowed opponent—
Just as a hunting dog keeps baying, charging
A stag trapped by a river or a fence
That’s hung with terrifying scarlet feathers;
Panicking at the ambush and the high bank,
The prey runs back and forth in countless dodges;
The zestful Umbrian hound with gaping jaws
Has got him—almost—now—but snaps on air.
Then a real outcry rose, the pools around them
Echoed, the whole sky thundered with the uproar:
On the run, Turnus screamed at the Rutulians—
Each one by name, and shouted for his own sword.
Aeneas threatened instant death for any
Who came near, and to terrify them more,
He vowed he’d raze their town. He hobbled on,
Chased Turnus clear around five times, and five
The other way. It was no sport; no small prize
Was now at stake, but Turnus’ life and blood.
An olive tree, with bitter leaves, had stood there,
Sacred to Faunus. Sailors saved from shipwrecks
Revered it: pledges for Laurentum’s god
Were put there, nailed-­up gifts and hanging clothes.
The Trojans cut it down—though it was holy—
With other trees, to clear a space to fight on.
The heir of Dardanus, Aeneas, hurled
A spear into the stump. It stuck there, anchored
In the tough root. He stooped to wrench it free:
The weapon might outrun the man he couldn’t.
A raving terror now took hold of Turnus:
“Faunus, and queenly Earth, I beg for pity.
Hold the spear, if I’m faithful to the rites
Aeneas’ mob, by making war, has spoiled.”
This was his prayer, which didn’t go to waste.
Aeneas struggled at the clinging stump,
But all his strength could not suffice to loosen
Its hardwood jaws; and while he kept on straining,
The Daunian goddess—in Metiscus’ form—
Rushed up and gave her brother back his sword.
Venus, in rage—why was the nymph allowed this?—
Came near and tore the spear out. Both men, hulking,
Courage and arms recovered now—one holding
His trusted sword, one looming, spear in hand—
Took panting stands as Mars’ competitors.
All-­powerful Olympus’ king addressed
Juno, who watched them from a tawny cloud:
“My wife, what’s left to do? Isn’t it over?
You do admit that fate must raise Aeneas
Up to the stars, a god of Italy.
What hopes can keep you in these chilly clouds?
How could a mortal weapon strike a god?
What of the sword Juturna (you control her!)
Returned to Turnus, new strength for the beaten?
Give way at last, I beg you. Don’t let sorrow
Gnaw you in silence—and I want an end
To brooding grievances from your dear mouth.
It’s time now. You were free to hound the Trojans
On land and sea, ignite this evil war,
Destroy a house, bring mourning to a wedding.
I won’t allow you more.” The child of Saturn,
The goddess, answered, with her head bent humbly:
“Father Jove, god of power, I knew your will,
And left the earth and Turnus—otherwise,
You wouldn’t see me here, meek and accepting.
I’d be there, ringed with flames, down on the front lines,
Dragging the Trojans to the bitter fight.
I urged Juturna, yes, to help her brother—
Poor man—and sanctioned bolder acts to save him,
But never meant for her to draw her bow:
By the relentless spring of Styx, I swear it,
The only oath that awes the gods in heaven.
But I concede and leave the fights I loathe,
Begging one thing for Latium, for your children’s
Glorious state—no law of fate forbids it.
When they make peace with a propitious marriage—
Let them!—and treaties and shared laws unite them,
Don’t make the native Latin warriors change
Their ancient ways and name; don’t force on them
The clothes and speech of Troy. Let Latium be,
And grant it centuries of Alban kings,
And Roman stock, strong with Italian courage.
Troy fell. Now let her name lie fallen with her.”
The world’s and humankind’s creator smiled.
“Truly, you’re Saturn’s child too, my own sister:
You hold such waves of anger in your heart.
What good, though, has it done you? So be calm:
I grant your wish, you’ve won, I give up gladly.
Ausonians will keep their speech and customs
And name unchanged. The Trojans will fade out
As they breed in. I’ll introduce their rites,
But make one Latin people, with one language.
You’ll see the new race, with Italian blood,
Surpass the world—and gods—in piety.
Nobody else will bring you greater worship.”
Juno agreed and changed her mind, contented,
And at that moment left the cloud in heaven.
Now the gods’ father had a plan in mind
To force Juturna from her brother’s side.
The twin fiends named for horror are the Dirae.
The Dead of Night gave birth to them, together
With deepest hell’s Megaera. She wound all three
With coiling snakes and gave them windy wings.
They serve before the throne of ruthless Jove
As goads of terror for poor humankind
When the god’s ruler causes deadly plagues
Or menaces a guilty town with war.
One of this pair of ghouls was sent by Jove
From heaven to Juturna as an omen.
Fast as a whirlwind she flew down to earth,
Arrowlike, as if some Cydonian
Or Parthian bow had sent her hurtling, poisoned
With savage gall that has no remedy,
Whirring through clouds, unnoticed in the shadows.
So Night’s child made her swift way to the world.
Seeing the Trojan lines and Turnus’ columns,
Quickly she shrank to look like that small bird
That perches on deserted roofs, or tombs,
And sings—an evil omen—in the dark night.
The demon screeched and harried back and forth
In Turnus’ face, wings beating on his shield.
A strange, numb panic made his body helpless.
His hair stood up; his voice clung in his throat.
Juturna, his poor sister, knew the far hiss
Of the fiend’s wings; she tore her loosened hair,
Scratched her face bloody, pounded her breasts livid.
“Turnus, my brother, how can I help now?
What else must I endure? I have no skill
To keep you living. Can I fight this omen?
At last I’ll leave the field. No need to threaten,
Hideous birds. I know your deadly wingbeats;
I know the will of Jupiter, high-­minded,
High-­handed. But can this be how he pays
For my virginity? He made me deathless,
And yet if I could die, I’d end my anguish
And go with my poor brother through the shadows.
What is the good of my unending life
Without you? Can the earth gape wide enough
To drop me to the shades, though I’m immortal?”
With many sighs, the goddess draped her head
In a gray veil and plunged into the river.
Aeneas pushed ahead and shook his spear—
Big as a tree—and spoke from his fierce heart:
“What’s the delay now, Turnus? Why fall back?
It’s not a race, but combat, hand to hand.
Change into every form. See what your courage
Or skill can do. Soar up into the sky,
Or find a hole down underground to hide in.”
But Turnus shook his head. “I’m not afraid
Of your words when the gods—and Jove—attack me.”
He looked around: by chance, a massive boulder,
An ancient bulk, was lying on the plain,
A marker to solve conflicts over fields.
Ten chosen men could scarcely shoulder it—
Men of the strength that earth brings forth today.
The hero grappled, grasped it, made a run
And rose and heaved it whirling at his rival.
But the familiar speed was not in Turnus,
Or strength to lift and throw that giant stone.
His knees gave way, his blood was frozen hard.
The stone went rolling through the empty air,
But not so far that it could strike its target.
As, when at night our eyes are sealed with slumber,
We dream we can’t run on by any effort,
And finally sink exhausted as we struggle;
The tongue is powerless, the body loses
The strength it knew, the voice and words are gone;
So the grim goddess blocked off every path
For Turnus’ valor. Baffled and distracted,
He gazed at the Rutulians and the city—
And froze in dread: his death was coming close.
Where could he—run—attack? His chariot—
Where? And his sister, who’d been driving it?
He paused. Aeneas shook the fatal spear,
Saw what chance offered, flung across the distance
With all his strength. No catapulted stones
Smash against walls like this. No thunderbolts
Strike with such noise. Strong as a hurricane,
Through the shield’s seven layers, bringing death,
Then through the breastplate’s lower edge it hissed,
And then into his thigh. And at the impact
Huge Turnus toppled forward on one knee.
The hills threw back the groans, the groves reechoed
The sounds Rutulians—on their feet now—made.
The humbled man looked up and stretched a hand out:
“I’ve earned this—I won’t grovel for my life.
Use your good luck. But if a parent’s anguish
(Think of Anchises) can at all concern you,
Then pity Daunus—please—in his old age.
Send me, or else my corpse, back to my family.
You’ve triumphed: the Italians see me begging
Mercy. Lavinia is now your wife.
Lay down your hatred.” There Aeneas stood,
Fierce, armed—but now his eyes had grown unsteady,
His hand still; and his halting change of heart
Grew stronger. Then he saw, on that tall body,
The belt with shining studs his young friend Pallas
Had once worn. Turnus, who had cut him down,
Displayed the hateful token on his shoulder.
Aeneas stared—the spoils brought back to him
His wild grief, and he burned with brutal rage.
“So you’ll escape, in loot from one of mine?
It’s Pallas who now slaughters you, to offer
Your vicious blood in payment for your crime.”
Incensed, he thrust the sword through Turnus’ chest.
The body’s warmth and strength dissolved; the life
Groaned in its rancor and fled down to Hades.
