All faces now were fixed on him in silence.
Father Aeneas, on the high couch, spoke:
“Must I renew a grief beyond description,
Telling how Greeks destroyed the power of Troy,
That tear-­stained kingdom, since I saw the worst,
While playing no small part? Telling about it,
A Myrmidon, a Dolopian, a trooper
Of cruel Ulysses too would weep. The moist night
Falls to its end, the setting stars urge sleep.
But if you are so passionate to hear,
Briefly, of the death agony of Troy,
I will begin, although my heart shrinks back
From memory. The years of war had broken
The Greek kings; destiny had pushed them back.
They built a mountainous horse, with woven ribs
Of fir—Athena’s genius aided them.
‘An offering for a safe voyage home!’ The news spread.
They picked the bravest men. With stealth they shut them
Into the darkness of the flanks: an armed squad
Filling the vast, deep cavern of the belly.
Tenedos shows offshore, the famous island—
7–­Myrmidon . . . Dolopian: Greek
warriors from Thessaly. The Myrmidons
were under the command of Achilles,
the Dolopians of Achilles’ son, Neo­
ptolemus.
11–­Briefly: Aeneas’ narrative, modeled on Odysseus’ inset narrative in
Odyssey 9–12, occupies books 2–3.

5

10

15

20

13–­The years of war: The siege of
Troy lasted ten years.
21–­Tenedos: An Aegean island just
off the coast of Turkey, near the entrance
of the Dardanelles.

. 31 .

BOOK 2
Wealthy while Priam’s empire still existed,
Now just an inlet with its treacherous mooring.
They sailed there, to a lonely beach, and lurked,
As if they’d caught the winds out toward Mycenae.
The whole of Troy broke free of its long mourning.
We poured out through the open gates, delighted
To tour the Greek camp on the empty shore.
Achilles’ tent was here, Dolopians there.
The fleet moored there. Here was the battleground.
Some ogled that huge horse, gift of the virgin
Minerva for our ruin. Thymoetes
Was first to want it taken to our stronghold—
His own guile or the fate of Troy inspired him.
Capys and those who shared his good sense urged us
To hurl the treacherous bounty of the Greeks
Into the sea or set a fire beneath it,
Or drill into the secrets of its womb.
The fickle mob took opposite positions.
Now, leading his attendants in a crowd,
Laocoön rushed raging from the town’s heights.
‘Poor Trojans, have you lost your minds?’ he shouted.
‘You think they’re gone? Are any Greek gifts given
Sincerely? Don’t you know Ulysses better?
The Greeks are hiding in this wooden gadget,
Or else this is a siege machine they’ve built
For spying or alighting on our homes,
Or some such trick. Don’t trust the horse, my people.
25–­Mycenae: Here, Greece in general.
32–­Minerva: The Greeks pretended
to leave the Trojan Horse as an offering
to Minerva to guarantee safe passage
home.
32–­Thymoetes: A Trojan. His son

25

30

35

40

45

was put to death to avert a prophecy linking his birth to the downfall of the city;
Thymoetes’ suggestion here may be an
act of revenge.
35–­Capys: A companion of Aeneas.
41–­Laocoön: A Trojan priest of Neptune.

. 32 .

BOOK 2
Even when they bring presents, I fear Greeks.’
He hurled a massive spear with all his strength
Into the creature’s round and riveted belly.
The shaft was planted, quivering; the deep,
Recoiling womb sent out an echoing groan.
Had heaven willed it, had we all been sane,
We would have followed, shattering the Greek lair;
Priam’s high citadel would still be standing.
Shepherds approached the king now, clamoring,
Dragging a youth whose hands were tied behind him,
A stranger they had come across just now—
But he had plotted this, to open Troy
To Greeks. He was tough-­mindedly prepared
To trap us with his lies or yield to death.
Trojan boys rushed to view the captive, crowding
Around him, seeing who could taunt him hardest.
Hear how the Greek plot worked: this single crime
Shows them for what they are.
Amid those stares, unarmed and looking harried,
He stood and swept his eyes around our ranks.
‘Is there some sea, is there some land to take me?’
He cried. ‘I’m finished. What do I have left?
No place among the Greeks, and now the Trojans
As well are shouting for my blood in payment.’
At this our rage was calmed, our onslaught stifled.
But still we had to know—who were his people?
What was the news he brought? Why should we spare him?
He finally put his ‘fear’ aside and spoke:
‘All that I’ll say, your highness, is the truth,

49–­Even when they bring presents,
I fear Greeks: Timeo Danaos et dona ferentis; one of the most famous sayings in the
poem, often quoted.

50

55

60

65

70

75

76–­The line is thought to be spurious.

. 33 .

BOOK 2
Whatever happens. First, I am a Greek,
Sinon. If Fortune made me desolate,
She will not make me lie, cruel as she is.
Perhaps you’ve heard the name of Palamedes,
The glorious son of Belus, whom the Greeks
Slanderously, outrageously accused
Of treason when he stood against the war.
They drained his life’s light, but they mourn him now.
My father, who was poor, sent me in boyhood
As Palamedes’ page, since we were family.
While he still safely ruled, strong in the councils
Of kings, I had my share of reputation
And honor. But when sly Ulysses’ envy—
You know it—thrust him from this upper world,
I lived in mourning darkness, persecuted
And raging at my blameless patron’s death.
I was in fact a fool, and pledged revenge
If chance allowed, if I came home in triumph
To Argos. Hatred rose against my words.
This tipped me toward disaster. Now Ulysses
Kept threatening, accusing, scattering rumors,
Recruiting helpers in his plot against me.
He didn’t rest until the seer Calchas—
But no, it’s useless; you don’t want to hear it.
I’m wasting time. If Greeks are all the same,
Kill me, I’m Greek. The sons of Atreus
Would pay you well. Ulysses would be pleased.’
This only made us burn to hear it all,
In innocence of evil Argive guile.

81–­Palamedes: A Greek warrior who
was framed by Ulysses and wrongfully
executed as a traitor.
82–­Belus: A distant ancestor of Pala‑

80

85

90

95

100

105

medes, not to be confused with Dido’s
father.
100– ­Calchas: A Greek seer, tasked
with determining the will of the gods for
the army.

. 34 .

BOOK 2
Shaking with false emotion, he continued:
‘The Greeks were often yearning, often trying
To leave. The endless war had worn them out.
I wish they’d gone. The stormy winter sea
Or South Wind often turned them from the journey.
The horse of maple wood stood here already,
When the sky rang with even louder storms.
In doubt, we sent Eurypylus to query
Apollo’s oracle, and got bad news:
“You Greeks appeased the winds with virgin blood
When you first traveled to the shores of Troy.
Now you must offer yet another Greek life
For your return.” The common soldiers heard this
With horror. Icy trembling seized their marrow:
Whose death was it Apollo asked of them?
Ulysses dragged old Calchas in, with much noise
And bullying: What did the god decree?
Many foresaw the schemer’s brutal crime:
They saw what was to come but held their peace.
The seer in his tent refused for ten days
To give a name and send a man to death.
Finally, driven by Ulysses’ clamor,
He spoke. They’d planned it: I would be the gift.
They all agreed. Each, fearing death, was happy
To see it land on my pathetic self.
The ghastly day had come: the salted grain,
Fillets around my head, the ritual.
I broke these chains of death—yes, I confess it.
In the swamp, among the reeds, I hid all night,
Breathlessly waiting for the fleet to sail.
114–­Eurypylus: The son of Telephus,
leader of the Thessalians.
116–­virgin blood: Before setting out
for Troy the Greeks had sacrificed Iphi-

110

115

120

125

130

135

geneia, a daughter of Agamemnon, to
ensure favorable winds for sailing.
133–­Fillets: wool ribbons used
to decorate sacrificial animals before
slaughter; they were also worn by priests.

. 35 .

BOOK 2
I can’t return again to see my homeland,
Sweet children, and the father that I yearn for—
Perhaps they now may pay for my escape;
My weakness might just cost them their poor lives.
I beg you by those powers that know the truth,
By any pure trust placed in anything
Among us mortals, pity my affliction—
Pity the persecution of a good heart.’
We spared his life; we even pitied him.
Priam stepped in and had the man’s tight chains
And manacles removed, and spoke these kind words:
‘Stranger, the Greeks are lost to you: forget them.
You will be ours. But answer truthfully:
Who had the giant horse set up, and why?
Is it for worship or for making war?’
Greek cunning and conspiracy now caused him
To raise his hands—unbound now—to the stars.
‘By these eternal fires and sacred Troy,
By the altar and the evil blade I fled,
And the god’s ribbons that this victim wore:
It’s right to break the holy bonds of Greeks,
To hate them and make public everything
They hide. My nation’s laws don’t hold me now.
But keep your word, since Troy’s saved if my news
Is true, and proves rich payment for my safety.
All that the Greeks could hope for in this war
Was in the power of Pallas. Since the plotter
Ulysses and the godless Diomedes
Slaughtered the keepers of the soaring fortress,
And tore away that fateful effigy,
156–­the god’s ribbons that this vic­
tim wore: fillets; see 2.133n.
164–­Ulysses and the godless Dio­
medes: Ulysses and Diomedes are especially villainous Greeks in the Aeneid:

140

145

150

155

160

165

Ulysses as the inventor of the Trojan
Horse, Diomedes as the warrior who
almost killed Aeneas in the Iliad (see
1.96n).

. 36 .

BOOK 2
The Palladium, from its shrine, and even pawed
Her virgin fillets with their bloody fingers,
The tide is turned, the Greek cause slipping backward.
Their strength is broken by her stubborn anger.
She gave us signs, miraculous and clear:
We’d scarcely set her image in the camp
When its eyes flashed and burned, and salty sweat
Ran down it. From the ground it leaped three times
And shook its shield and spear—amazing story.
Calchas’ divine advice: escape by sea;
The Greeks would not raze Troy till they returned
To Argos for new omens and brought back
The deity they’d taken in their curved ships.
They’ve sailed home to Mycenae, to rearm
And gather gods as allies. They will cross
Back here and strike. So Calchas read the omens.
This statue pays for the Palladium,
An offering to violated godhead.
Calchas commanded that it be immense,
A mass of joined logs reaching to the sky,
And never pass the gates into your city
And save you, as the cult of Pallas did.
Handle Minerva’s gift impiously,
And ruin—may the gods turn back the omen
Against the seer—will meet the realm of Priam.
If your hands help it climb into your city,
Asia can hurl itself in war against
The walls of Pelops, in our grandsons’ time.’
Sinon’s false oaths and trickery convinced us.
167–68–­
Palladium . . . fillets: A
statue of Minerva, upon whose protection the city depended; its title is derived
from her Greek name, Pallas Athena.
The fillets are the ribbons sanctifying the
statue.

170

175

180

185

190

195

193–94–­Asia . . . Pelops: Here Asia
refers to Troy and the walls of Pelops to
Greece.

. 37 .

BOOK 2
The tears that he contrived did what Achilles
And Diomedes and ten years of war
And a thousand ships could not: they brought us down.
“Poor Trojans! Something still more horrible
Sprang up to fill our spirits with confusion.
Laocoön, the chosen priest of Neptune,
Was at the altar, slaughtering a large bull,
When over the calm sea from Tenedos
Came two huge coiled snakes—even now I shudder.
Breasting the water, paired, they sought the beach.
They reared among the waves, their blood-­red crests
Towering, while their bellies trailed the surface.
Their backs were flowing in enormous spirals.
The salt foam roared. But now they reached dry land.
Fire and blood were brimming in their eyes.
Their quivering tongues licked hissing mouths. We ran,
White with fear. They were aimed, in their incursion,
Straight at Laocoön—he wasn’t first, though:
Each gripped a tiny son of his, entangling
The body, gnawing on its wretched limbs.
Their father snatched a spear and ran to help.
Both serpents caught him in their giant whorls.
Their scaly length went twice around his waist
And throat; above him reared their heads and necks.
He fought to rip apart the knotted forms.
Their slime and poison-­black drool soaked his fillets.
His shrieks of agony rose to the sky,

198–­a thousand ships: A rounded
number; there are 1,186 in Homer’s catalogue of ships.
204–­two huge coiled snakes: It is
possible that Vergil knew the second-­
century BCE marble sculpture of Lao-

200

205

210

215

220

coön and his two sons, which Pliny regarded as superlative, and which inspired
the German Romantic critic and dramatist Gotthold Ephraim Lessing’s Laocoon:
An Essay upon the Limits of Painting and
Poetry (1766).

. 38 .

BOOK 2
As when a bull escapes the altar, shedding
The ax that was half-­buried in his neck.
The snakes now ducked away, made for the fierce
Tritonian’s temple in its lofty setting.
At the statue’s feet they hid, beneath the round shield.
Now a fresh terror twisted through our hearts.
We quaked; some murmured that Laocoön
Deserved this for the hideous crime of striking
The sacred wooden image with his spear:
‘Bring it where it belongs. Beseech the power
Of the goddess.’
We cut the walls and opened up the city.
Bare-­legged work put rollers underneath
Its feet, and tightened ropes around its neck.
The great catastrophe climbed to the fortress,
Pregnant with arms. Young boys and girls around it
Sang hymns and touched the cables in their joy.
It loomed into the middle of the town.
Heroic walls of Ilium, the gods’ home,
My country! Four times in the gate itself
It halted—weapons clattered in its belly.
We pushed on, blind with passion and distracted,
And set the monster in our sacred stronghold.
Cassandra spoke then, echoing the future.
But by the gods’ will, Troy could never hear her.
We wretches on our last day garlanded
The temples of the gods all through the city.
The heavens swung round, night leaped from the ocean
To wrap the earth and sky—and Greek deceit—
In its great shadow. On the walls the Trojans
Sprawled, muffled in a deep, exhausted sleep.
The Greek fleet came already in formation,
226–­Tritonian: An epithet for Mi‑
nerva.

. 39 .

225

230

235

240

245

250

BOOK 2
From Tenedos—the friendly moon hung silent—
To the familiar shore; and now the king’s ship
Signaled with flame. Sinon, protected by
Heaven’s harsh rulings, slipped pine bolts, birthed Greeks.
The horse gaped to the sky. The eager chieftains
Slid from the wooden cave and down the rope:
Machaon, then Thessandrus, Sthenelus,
Acamas, cruel Ulysses, Thoas, Peleus’
Grandson Neoptolemus, Menelaus,
And Epeos, who’d crafted this device.
They swarmed a city sunk in wine and sleep,
Slaughtered the guards, opened the gateway, let
Their comrades in, uniting ranks as planned.
It was the time when that first, sweetest sleep,
A gift from gods, slips into weary mortals.
I saw an anguished Hector in my dreams,
Streaming with tears and black with dust and gore.
His feet were swollen with the thongs that pierced them
When he was dragged behind the chariot.
How different from that Hector who returned
Wearing the plundered armor of Achilles
Or hurled our Trojan torches onto Greek ships!
His beard was dirty; dried blood caked his hair.
He bore the many wounds he got defending
His city’s walls. And in that dream I wept
And greeted that brave man with mournful words:
‘Light of our country, truest hope of Troy,
Why were you gone so long? What shore has sent us

262–­Peleus: The father of Achilles
and grandfather of Neoptolemus.
263–­Neoptolemus: The son of
Achilles, also called Pyrrhus, portrayed
by Vergil as more cruel and violent than
his father.

255

260

265

270

275

280

275–­the plundered armor of Achilles:
Hector acquired Achilles’ armor when he
killed Achilles’ friend Patroclus, to whom
Achilles had lent it.

. 40 .

BOOK 2
This longed-­for sight of you? So many died.
Your city and its people are worn out
With all their griefs. What undeserved disaster
Marred your calm face? What are these wounds I see?’
He took no notice of my empty questions,
But, sighing from his heart’s depths, only said,
‘Child of the goddess, run, escape these flames.
The walls are taken. From its pinnacle
Troy falls. Our country, Priam—gone. If my hand
Could have defended Troy, you would be safe.
Troy trusts its cult, its household gods to you.
Take them to share your fate, find room across
The sea to build high walls for them again.’
Then from the inmost shrine he brought the ribbons
And mighty Vesta and her ceaseless fire.
Confusion and distress spread through the fortress.
My father’s house was set far back and sheltered
By trees, and yet the martial din pierced through;
Now terror broke in, bristling with its weapons.
Startled from sleep, I scrambled to the rooftop
And stood there, motionless and listening:
It was like fire the raging South Winds send
Into the wheat, or torrents from a mountain
That flatten thriving crops (the work of oxen),
And drag whole forests headlong; on a high rock
A shepherd stands and stares in bafflement.
Here was plain evidence of Greek connivance.
The fire topped Deïphobus’ broad house
And brought it down. Ucalegon’s beside it

293–­its household gods: The Penates. See 1.379n.
297–­Vesta: Goddess of the hearth.
See 1.379n.
310–­Deïphobus: Helen’s second Tro-

285

290

295

300

305

310

jan husband, whom she married after the
death of Paris. Aeneas will meet his spirit
in the Underworld at 6.494–534.
311–­Ucalegon: One of Priam’s aged
counselors.

. 41 .

BOOK 2
Had caught. The wide Sigean strait shone red.
The shouts of men, the ring of trumpets rose.
Blindly I seized my weapons—senselessly—
But my heart burned to gather friends and rush
To some high place. Delirious rage pitched me
Ahead: how beautiful to die in battle!
The priest of Phoebus of the citadel,
Othrys’ son Panthus, clutching holy emblems
And routed gods and his small grandson, dashed
Through the Greek spears in panic to my door.
‘Where is the hardest fight?’ I asked, ‘Our strong point?’
Quickly he answered me, but with a groan:
‘This is the last day, inescapable
For our nation—Troy, the Trojans, and our glory
Are gone. Fierce Jupiter has given all this
To Argos. Greeks are masters of these flames.
The horse is looming, pouring troops among us.
Sinon in mocking triumph scatters fire
Everywhere, and as many thousand others
As great Mycenae sent are at the broad gates.
In alleyways the spears are poised for ambush.
A flashing line of sword points is prepared
To murder us. Guards at the entrances
Scarcely resist them in the first blind clash.’
The priest’s words and the gods’ power, felt within me,
Drove me to burning battle. The grim Furies,
The roars and shouts that rose to heaven called me.
I drew in comrades: Rhipeus, Epytus
(Great warrior) emerged by moonlight; Dymas,
312–­Sigean strait: Near the Sigean
promontory on the coast of Asia Minor,
close to the mouth of the Hellespont.
319–­Othrys’ son Panthus: A Greek
from Delphi whom Priam made a priest
of Apollo after his abduction to Troy.

315

320

325

330

335

340

337–­The grim Furies: Female Underworld deities associated with revenge,
they also sometimes personify the drive
to battle.

. 42 .

BOOK 2
Hypanis, and Coroebus, Mygdon’s son,
Strode with me—this young man had journeyed here
In burning and deranged love for Cassandra,
To fight, as Priam’s son-­in-­law, for Troy—
Poor man, his promised bride had raged and warned him:
He hadn’t heard.
Now when I saw them come together ready
For war, I urged them on. ‘Come, are you burning
To waste your courage, fighters, following me
Into a final clash? You see our fortune.
All of the gods who kept this kingdom standing
Have left their shrines and altars. These are flames
You fight. Let’s rush to die in that dense combat.
The beaten have one hope: to lose all hope.’
The young men’s frenzy grew. Like plundering wolves
Whose ravening stomachs drive them on a blind hunt
Through black fog while their cubs, with dry throats, wait
Back in the lair, we kept on pressing forward
Through our armed enemies, straight through the city
To certain death. The blackness swirled around us.
Who could describe that night’s catastrophes?
What tears could show our agony in full?
An empire, generations old, was falling.
We saw unmoving bodies sprawled and scattered
In houses, on the roads, on holy thresholds
Of gods’ homes. But not only Trojans paid
The price in blood. New courage seized our hearts.
Greeks in their triumph fell. Ferocious grief,
Terror, and every kind of death enclosed us.
Androgeus with his mass of troops was first
To meet us. He mistook us for his allies
346–­
He hadn’t heard: Coroebus
does not believe Cassandra: she is fated
to prophesy accurately and never be believed.

345

350

355

360

365

370

370–­Androgeus: A companion of
Aeneas.

. 43 .

BOOK 2
And shouted at us these congenial words:
‘Hurry, men! What’s this dragging of your feet?
Why hold back? All the rest are plundering
Troy’s flames. You’ve left your tall ships only now?’
No reassuring answers came to him—
He knew he’d stumbled into his opponents.
Stunned, he retreated from his words and us.
Like someone on a brambly path who treads
On a hidden snake and backs away in terror
From the blue swollen neck, erect in rage,
Androgeus looked at us and backed up, shaking.
We swarmed around them with our weapons, scattered
And killed them—they were panicked in that strange place.
So Fortune blessed our very first endeavor.
Coroebus was exuberant; he shouted,
‘Friends, we should take the road that Fortune’s favored
At the beginning: there we’ll find our safety.
Let’s put Greek armor on and swap our shields.
A trick’s as good as courage in a war,
And here’s our chance!’ He took the long-­plumed helmet
And shield with its fine blazon from the leader,
And put them on, and belted on the Greek sword.
Then Rhipeus too, and Dymas, and others
Eagerly armed with fresh loot. We set out
Among the Greeks, under Greek auspices.
In the thick dark we skirmished many times
With them, and we sent many down to Orcus,
While others sought their ships on sheltered beaches.
A truly craven few climbed back and hid
In the familiar belly of the Greek horse.
No one should trust the gods against their will.
Priam’s unmarried daughter, streaming-­haired,
398–­Orcus: The Underworld.
403–­
Priam’s unmarried daughter:
Cassandra, whose rape by the Greek war-

375

380

385

390

395

400

rior Ajax the Lesser sets Minerva against
the Greeks.

. 44 .

BOOK 2
Was dragged out of Minerva’s shrine. She lifted
Her burning eyes to heaven, uselessly—
Her eyes, because her tender hands were tied.
Seeing this put Coroebus in a frenzy.
He threw his doomed self straight against the captors;
We followed, rushing where the clash was densest.
But now, hurled from the temple’s lofty rooftop,
Trojan spears overwhelmed us, abject slaughter:
Our plumes, our emblems turned us into Greeks.
Roaring frustration at the young girl’s rescue,
The gathered Greeks attacked: ferocious Ajax,
Atreus’ two sons, Pyrrhus with his army—
As when a whirlwind breaks and sets the West Wind
Against the South and East who relishes
Driving Dawn’s horses. Woods roar, Nereus
Rages and foams, and from its floor the sea rears.
Even the men we’d ambushed in night’s shadows,
Routing them, chasing them all through the city,
Emerged now they could see through our disguise,
And also hear our language wasn’t Greek.
They swarmed us instantly. Coroebus fell first,
Before the mighty warrior goddess’ altar.
Peneleus killed him. Rhipeus fell too—
It was the gods’ will, though no other Trojan
Served justice better. Hypanis and Dymas
Died on their comrades’ spears. Apollo’s emblem
That reverent Panthus wore was no protection.
By Trojan ashes, by those fatal flames
I swear: in that collapse I shirked no fighting
Or other hazard. If my fate had been
To fall, I would have earned it. I was stranded
With Iphitus (weighed down with age) and Pelias

414–­Ajax: See 1.41n.
415–­Pyrrhus: See 2.263n.

418–­Nereus: A sea deity.

. 45 .

405

410

415

420

425

430

435

BOOK 2
(Lame from a wound Ulysses had inflicted).
We now heard shouts and ran to Priam’s palace,
Where what we saw drove all the other battles
And massacres in Troy to nothingness.
Implacably the Greeks attacked the building,
Crowding the door, their shields above their heads.
Ladders gripped walls beside the gates; feet struggled
Toward higher rungs, while left hands grasped the shelter
Of shields and right hands reached to seize the gables.
The Trojans ripped up parapets and whole roofs
For weapons of defense. They knew the end
Was coming: they would fight until it came.
They rolled down gilded beams, the ornaments
Of generations. Others drew their swords
And in a dense rank blocked the gates below.
So now we turned to bring the palace help,
To bring relief and new strength to the beaten.
There was a hidden door that linked two parts
Of Priam’s house, remote and at the back.
Andromache, poor thing, while Troy survived,
Went through there unattended to her in-­laws,
Taking Astyanax to see his grandsire.
This way I reached the rooftops, where the Trojans
Uselessly, pitiably hurled their weapons.
A soaring tower, by a steep drop down,
Was once our lookout onto all of Troy,
And the whole Greek encampment with its ships.
Now we assailed the tower’s upper stories,
Where joints were loose, and ripped it from its high perch,
Shoving it over. In a swift collapse
And roar it skidded down. On top of Greek ranks
455–­Andromache: The wife of
Hector.
457–­Astyanax: Hector’s infant son;

440

445

450

455

460

465

after the sack of Troy, he was thrown
from the city walls, as depicted in Euripides’ Trojan Women.

. 46 .

BOOK 2
It smashed—but others came. There was no pause
Of stones or other missiles.
Pyrrhus stood in the gateway to the courtyard,
Exultant, glittering in his bronze armor—
Just as a serpent, fed on poison weeds,
Emerges swollen from its winter burrow
And sheds its skin and gleams, its youth renewed,
And swirls its glossy length and rears its head
Straight toward the sun, and darts its three-­forked tongue.
Huge Periphas, Achilles’ squire and driver
Automedon, and all the Scyrian troops
Pressed up and hurled their torches to the roof.
Pyrrhus was at the front. He snatched an ax
To smash the bronze-­bound doors and tear their hinges,
First hacking out a panel for a hole
In the hard oak—a wide and gaping window.
Inside, the house: its atrium stretched back—
The ancient kings’ and Priam’s sanctuary—
And on the threshold stood its armed defenders.
Sounds of disaster and confusion echoed
Throughout the place, with women’s lamentations
And howls. Shouting struck the golden stars.
Terrified mothers roamed all through the mansion,
And clung to doorposts, pressing kisses on them.
Strong as his father, Pyrrhus came on. Locks,
Guards couldn’t hold him back. The battering ram
Made the door sway, unhinged, and topple forward.
The Greeks broke murderously through. They killed
The first defenders, swarmed through all the rooms.
A foaming, storming river is far gentler,
Which roars out past its mounded banks’ resistance.
477–­Automedon: The chariot driver
for Achilles and later for his son Neo­
ptolemus.

. 47 .

470

475

480

485

490

495

BOOK 2
Swollen, it tears through broad fields, sweeping herds
And barns along. I saw there, in the doorway,
Blood-­frenzied Neoptolemus, Atreus’ sons,
Hecuba with her hundred daughters, Priam,
Whose blood would foul the altar flames he’d blessed.
The fifty bedrooms (bountiful with grandsons),
Pillars that flaunted gold barbarian spoil—
Everything fell. Where flames failed, Greeks laid hold.
Perhaps you want to know how Priam died.
He saw his city fallen, taken, gates
Torn open, and the enemy inside.
On shaking shoulders he set armor—last worn
Decades ago—strapped on a useless sword,
And rushed to die in hordes of hostile soldiers.
Beneath steep, open heaven in his courtyard
Stood a great altar, where an ancient laurel
Leaned to embrace the household gods with shade.
Hecuba and her daughters ringed the high shrine
Like doves that rush for refuge from a black storm,
Futilely, and embraced the effigies.
The queen saw Priam in his youthful armor
And said, ‘Poor husband, what insanity
Dressed you for war? Where are you hurrying?
No such defenders, no such help is called for
Today—not even if my Hector lived.
Retreat here, let this altar keep us safe,
Or die with us.’ She took the old king’s hand
And in that sacred place she sat him down.
But look! The Trojan prince Polites ran
From Pyrrhus’ carnage, ducked through hostile spears.
Down the long porch, across the empty courtyard,
Wounded, he fled. Pyrrhus in bloodlust followed,
501–­
Hecuba with her hundred
daughters: Traditionally Priam and
Hecuba had fifty sons and fifty daugh-

ters; Virgil is counting
daughters-­in-­law here.

. 48 .

500

505

510

515

520

525

Hecuba’s

BOOK 2
Thrusting his spear, grasping beyond his reach.
Emerging in his father’s sight at last,
Polites fell. Blood, life gushed out of him.
Now Priam, though encircled by the slaughter,
Didn’t hold back from shouting in his fury:
‘If there is sight and conscience up in heaven,
The gods will give you your deserved reward,
Their thanks for this outrageous crime, for letting
Me see with my own eyes my own son’s murder.
You have defiled a father’s sight with death.
Achilles was your father? It’s a lie.
This isn’t how he fought. He had respect
For a trusting suppliant’s rights. He sent me back
To my throne with Hector’s corpse for burial.’
The old man threw a weak, unwarlike spear.
All it could do was clang across the bronze shield
And hang there by the leather of the boss.
Pyrrhus replied, ‘Then go tell Peleus’ son,
My father, how far short of him I fall.
Be sure he knows what hateful things I did.
So die.’ The king was dragged up to the altar,
Shaking and slipping in his own son’s blood.
A left hand gripped his hair. A right hand lifted
A flashing sword and sank it to the hilt.
As Priam watched Troy burn, its fortress topple,
Death took him, and he found his destined end.
But he had once been haughty lord of Asia,
Its lands, its peoples. On the shore a tall corpse
Lies nameless, with its head ripped from its shoulders.
542–43–­He sent me back . . . with
Hector’s corpse for burial: In the final
book of the Iliad, Achilles gives up his
rage and returns Priam’s son Hector’s
body for a proper funeral.

530

535

540

545

550

555

557–58–­On the shore a tall corpse
. . . from its shoulders: Priam’s corpse
is described in terms designed to evoke
the headless corpse of Pompey the Great
after his assassination on the shore of
Egypt in 48 BCE.

. 49 .

BOOK 2
That was the moment savage horror gripped me.
I froze. I seemed to see my darling father
In the king—the same age—with that savage gash,
Who gasped his life out. What about Creusa,
Alone—the house torn open—little Iulus?
I looked around to find some troops to help me.
Deserters! In their terror and exhaustion,
They’d jumped from walls or dashed into the flames.
Now I was all alone there—no, I saw
Through Vesta’s doorway, quiet, skulking, hiding,
Tyndareus’ daughter in the glare the flames
Shed for my ranging feet and searching eyes.
She feared the Trojans’ vengeance for their city,
Justice from Greeks, the outrage of a husband
Betrayed. She was a Fury for both lands.
A loathsome thing, she crouched behind the altar.
My heart caught fire: I had to punish her
For crimes that had destroyed my fatherland.
‘She’ll safely gaze on Sparta and Mycenae,
Where she was born? She’ll triumph as the queen?
She’ll see her father’s home, her husband, children—
Slaves will escort her, Trojan boys and ladies?
Priam is butchered. Troy burns. All this time,
Our shore has sweated blood. No—not for this.
To execute a woman brings no glory—
It is no triumph trailing praise behind it.
562–63–­Creusa . . . Iulus: Aeneas’
wife and son.
567–88–­The “Helen episode” is not
preserved in the most important manuscripts and may not have been written by
Vergil.
569–­Tyndareus’ daughter: Helen,
properly the daughter of Jupiter. Tyndareus, a Spartan king, is her mortal stepfather.

560

565

570

575

580

573–­Fury: Here a metaphor suggesting that Helen is the spirit of vengeance.
577–­Sparta . . . Mycenae: Helen was
originally the wife of Menelaus, the king
of Sparta. Mycenae here refers to Greece
in general or to Menelaus’ brother Agamemnon’s kingdom.

. 50 .

BOOK 2
Yet I’ll destroy this evil, bring it justice—
I will be praised—I’ll satisfy my heart
With flames of vengeance for my own who’re dying.’
My ranting fury carried me along—
Then, in pure brightness, through the night appeared
My gentle mother, never clear as now,
Revealing her divinity, the form
She has in heaven, and her hand restrained me.
Out of her rosy mouth there came these words:
‘My child, what pain could bring on such wild anger?
Why rave this way? Where is your love for us?
Where have you left Anchises, your poor father,
Broken with age? Ascanius, Creusa—
Are they still living? Everywhere around them
Greek forces mill. If not for my protection,
The weapons and the flames would have consumed them.
Give up your hatred of the lovely Helen
And wicked Paris, since it is the gods
Who are so cruel and topple wealthy Troy.
Look! I will take away the whole black cloud
That wraps around you mistily and dims
Your mortal sight. But have no fear and do
As I command. Have faith in me, your mother.
Here where you see a giant mass of rock
Shattered and strewn in rippling, dusty smoke,
Neptune has smashed the walls with his great trident,
And shaken and uprooted all the city.
Bloodthirsty Juno, girded with a sword,
Has seized the Scaean Gate and wildly calls
Her army from the ships.
There on the citadel Athena flashes
602–­Paris: The Trojan prince who
abducted Helen and thus triggered the
war.

585

590

595

600

605

610

615

613–­the Scaean Gate: The main gate
of Troy.

. 51 .

BOOK 2
Her ruthless Gorgon shield through burning cloud.
Father Zeus fills the Greeks with winning courage
In person, rousing gods against your troops.
Stop struggling and lay hold of your escape.
I’ll take you safely to your house’s door.’
She hid away then in the night’s thick mist.
Before me stood grim shapes, great deities
Hostile to Troy.
Truly, I saw the whole of Troy collapsing
In flames, and Neptune’s city overthrown,
Like an old mountain ash that several farmers
Hack with unresting axes in a race
To tear it loose. It menaces, its leaves
Tremble and dip, once its high top is shaken.
Wounds slowly weaken it. It gives a last groan,
Rips loose, drags devastation down the hillside.
Some god then led me from the roof, released me
From flames and weapons—all of these gave way.
When I arrived at my ancestral house,
Seeking my father first, and keen to take him
Into the towering hills before the others,
He said he couldn’t live past Troy’s extinction,
Wouldn’t bear exile. ‘You, with youth unbroken,
And hearty blood and staunch and solid strength,
Hurry, escape.
If those above had wanted me to live,
They would have saved my city. I’ve survived
One captured, fallen Troy—it is enough.
Say your farewell: this is my funeral.

616– ­Gorgon shield: Minerva’s
shield, the aegis, bore the decapitated head of the snake-­haired Gorgon
Medusa.
625–­Neptune’s city: Neptune and

620

625

630

635

640

Apollo were credited with building
Troy’s giant walls.
642–43:–­I’ve survived one captured,
fallen Troy: Troy had been captured once
before, by the hero Hercules.

. 52 .

BOOK 2
Some plunderer will show me mercy, ending
My life. To lie unburied is a small loss.
Uselessly, hated by the gods, I linger
Since heaven’s father and the king of men
Blasted me with his fire and windy thunder.’
These were his stubborn words. He wouldn’t move.
In tears we begged him—I, my wife Creusa,
My son, our household: ‘Don’t drag everything
Down with you, making heavy fate a rockslide.’
But he refused, fixed in his plans and place.
My hopeless urge was war again, and death.
Nothing in life remained to me but these.
‘Father, you thought I’d leave you here and run?
Abomination from a father’s mouth!
If out of towering Troy the gods leave nothing,
If you’re resolved to give this dying city
Yourself and us, the door to that stands open—
To Pyrrhus, soaked with Priam’s blood, who kills
The son and then the father at the altar.
Sweet mother, did you save me from the flames
Of war for this? The enemy in my home,
My son, my father, and Creusa lying
Streaked with each other’s blood, like slaughtered cattle?
My armor—bring it: we are not quite beaten.
Let me go back to battle with the Greeks.
We won’t all die today without revenge.’
Buckling my sword on, readying my shield
In my left hand, I was about to go.
My wife, there on the threshold, grasped my feet
And thrust our son, our little Iulus, toward me.
‘If you go out to die, then take us with you.
But if you think you have some hope in weapons,
Then guard this house. To whom do you leave Iulus,
Your father, me—your wife but soon your widow?”
Her words, her groans, her wails rang through the house—

. 53 .

645

650

655

660

665

670

675

BOOK 2
But an astounding portent intervened.
With Iulus in our arms, near our sad faces,
We saw a filmy, shining tongue of flame
Rise from his head; it licked his baby locks
And browsed around his temples harmlessly.
In our alarm we tried to slap the fire out
And drench the sacred burning of his hair.
Father Anchises gazed, though, toward the stars
In joy, stretched out his hands, and spoke these words:
‘Almighty Jupiter, if prayer can move you,
Look down on us; for our devotion, Father,
Grant us a sky sign now, affirm this omen.’
A sudden, crashing roar rose on the left side
While the old man still spoke, and through the dark sky
A comet hurtled, with a dazzling tail.
We saw it glide above the towering rooftops
And hide its brilliance in the woods of Ida.
Its tail still glowed, a long, light-­brimming furrow.
Its sulfur smoldered over all that country.
My father stood up, conquered by the truth.
In reverence for that sacred star, he prayed,
‘No more delay! Gods of my fathers, lead me:
I’ll follow. Save my family, save my grandson.
This was your sign, and Troy is in your power,
And I will yield and go with you, my son.’
Now through the walls the fire’s roar grew louder.
The blasts of heat were rolling closer to us.
‘Dear Father, let them set you on my shoulders.
I’ll carry you—you will not weigh me down.
Whatever happens, it will be one peril,
One rescue for us both. Our little Iulus
692–­on the left side: The favorable
side for omens.
708–­I’ll carry you: Aeneas shoulder-

680

685

690

695

700

705

710

ing his father and leading his son by the
hand became a famous motif in Western
art.

. 54 .

BOOK 2
Will walk with me, my wife will follow, far back.
Servants, pay close attention to my orders.
A barrow and an old deserted temple
Of Ceres lies outside the fort. Our fathers
Have long revered an ancient cypress near it.
We’ll all take separate paths but meet up there.
Father, you take our gods, these holy statues.
Smeared with the fresh gore of a dreadful battle,
I must not touch them but must first be cleansed
In running water.’
And now I pulled a tawny lionskin
Over my bending neck and brawny shoulders
And took my load. My little Iulus’ fingers
Were twined in mine; he trotted by my long steps.
Behind me came my wife. We went our dark way.
Before, I hadn’t minded hurtling spears
Or Greeks who massed against me from their ranks.
Now every gust and rustle panicked me
Because of whom I led and whom I carried.
Now I approached the gates. The journey seemed
Over, when suddenly a massive tramping
Sounded. My father, spying through the shadows,
Shouted, ‘Run—run, my boy! They’re coming close!
Shields flashing and the glint of bronze—I see it.’
Some hostile god then seized me in my terror
And stole my reason. Byways led me running
Beyond the streets of the familiar city.
And there my wife, Creusa—no!—was taken
By fate, or strayed, or else collapsed, exhausted.
Who knows? We never saw her anymore.
I didn’t think of her or note her absence
Until we reached the mound and ancient shrine
Of Ceres. When we gathered there, we found
Her gone—her husband, child, friends cheated of her.
I spared no god or man in my wild curses.

. 55 .

715

720

725

730

735

740

745

BOOK 2
Nothing in that whole city’s fall was crueler.
I left my son, my father, and my gods
In comrades’ care, deep in a twisted gully.
Bright in my weapons, I went back again,
Determined to run all those risks once more,
To risk my life in searching all of Troy.
I now approached the walls, the gates’ dim threshold
That I had fled from, searching out my footprints
Keenly in darkness, following them back.
The very silence filled my heart with terror.
I set out homeward—maybe she had gone there—
Maybe. The Greeks infested that whole building,
And instantly the flames, rolled by the wind,
Consumed the rooftop, shot insane heat skyward.
I passed to Priam’s palace and the fort.
On the forlorn porch, in the sanctuary
Of Juno, Phoenix stood with grim Ulysses,
Assigned to guard the spoils, heaped Trojan treasure,
Torn from the flaming shrines: the pure gold wine bowls,
The tableware and clothing of the gods
Were captured now. Mothers and children stood
In long lines, terrified.
I even dared to shout across the shadows,
Uselessly filling all the roads with grief,
Ceaselessly calling out Creusa’s name.
On I went, in my race to search the buildings—
But the sad apparition of Creusa
Came to me, taller than the living woman.
Shock choked my voice and stood my hair on end,
Yet what she said was soothing to my spirit:
‘Why do you rave and revel in this sorrow,
Sweet husband? It was by the will of heaven
762–­Phoenix: Accompanied Odysseus (Ulysses) on the embassy to Achilles
in Iliad 9.

. 56 .

750

755

760

765

770

775

BOOK 2
This came about. It was not right to take me:
The king of high Olympus will not let you.
In a long exile, you will plow a vast sea,
Clear to the West, where Tiber’s Lydian water
Serenely sweeps through warriors’ rich fields.
A thriving kingdom and a royal wife
Are yours. So weep no longer, though you love me.
I am a Trojan; Venus is your mother:
I will not serve Greek matrons in the cities
Of proud Dolopians and Myrmidons.
The gods’ Great Mother keeps me here—farewell.
We share a child: keep love for him alive.’
She left me, cutting short my words and weeping—
I had so much to say; her image faded.
Three times I threw my arms around her neck.
Three times her image fled my useless hands,
Like weightless wind and dreams that flit away.
When I rejoined my friends, the night was gone.
It startled me to find how many more
Had streamed there—mothers, men in their best years,
And youths had massed pathetically for exile.
They came from everywhere, supplied, resolved
To sail with me to any land I chose.
The Dawn Star rose past Ida’s highest slopes
And brought the day. The Greeks held every gate
To the city. There was nothing left to help us.
I picked my father up and sought the mountains.”
781–­Tiber’s Lydian water: The river
Tiber, in central Italy, flowed through
the land of the Etruscans, who were believed to have emigrated from Lydia in
Asia Minor.
788–­the gods’ Great Mother: The
mother goddess Cybele, whose cult worship originated in Anatolia, the same re-

780

785

790

795

800

gion as Troy, and spread to Rome in the
late third century BCE.
792–­Three times: the triple embrace
attempt comes from Odyssey 11; Vergil repeats this motif at 6.700.
801–­Ida: A sacred mountain near
Troy.

. 57 .
