“The gods’ decree brought down the Asian empire
And Priam’s blameless race. Proud Ilium fell.
Smoke rose from all of Neptune’s leveled Troy.
Prophecy drove us into empty lands
And far-­off exile. Toiling to build ships
In Phrygian Ida’s foothills near Antandros,
We didn’t know where fate would let us settle,
But mustered men. At summer’s start my father
Urged us to spread our sails to destiny.
I set out, weeping, from my country’s shores,
The plains where Troy had been. I swept to exile
With friends, my son, my family’s gods, the great gods.
Far off are spacious fields, the land of Mars
That Thracians till; once cruel Lycurgus reigned there.
Blood ties and ritual bound the place to Troy
While our luck held. I landed, set my first walls
On the curving shore, and formed a name from mine,
‘Aeneas’ Town’—but fate was hostile here.
Providing offerings for my mother, Venus,
And gods who bless new works, I planned to slaughter
A fine bull on the beach for heaven’s king.
3–­Neptune’s leveled Troy: Neptune
and Apollo built the walls of Troy.
6–­Phrygian Ida’s . . . Antandros: Antandros is a city at the base of Mount Ida,
on the opposite side from Troy.
12–­my family’s gods: The Penates.
See 1.379n.
13–14–­Mars . . . Thracians . . . cruel

5

10

15

20

Lycurgus: Thrace, in northeast Greece,
was associated with the war god Mars.
The legendary king Lycurgus persecuted
the worshippers of Bacchus and was
driven mad by the god.
18–­“Aeneas’ Town”: In legend,
Thrace was one of Aeneas’ stops. Cities
in the area were named after him.

. 58 .

BOOK 3
Nearby, a mound was topped with clumps of cornel
And myrtle bristling like a mass of spears.
I tried to wrench that greenwood from the ground
To roof the altar with the leaves and branches.
Then—hideous sight, almost unspeakable—
The first plant pulled away oozed drops of blood
From its torn roots, a filthy gore that tainted
The ground. A freezing tremor shot me through;
My blood ceased flowing, icy with my fear.
I didn’t stop but pulled a second stem,
To find whatever cause lay deep inside.
Again, black blood came dripping from the bark.
I prayed, confounded, to the rustic nymphs
And Father Mars, lord of the Getic fields,
To come and take away this omen’s curse.
At the third shaft, I made a harder try,
Struggling, with both knees planted in the sand.
Do I dare say this? From the barrow’s depths
I heard somebody sob and call to me:
‘Aeneas, no—don’t maul a buried corpse,
Polluting your clean hands. Troy gave me life,
You know me—me, not wood that oozes blood.
Run from this cruel land, from its greedy shore,
Since I am Polydorus, and a woodland
Of iron pierced me—here the sharp spears grow.’
Confused and terrified, I stood unmoving,
My hair on end, words clotted in my throat.
Poor Priam secretly sent Polydorus
And a great treasure to the Thracian king
Years ago, in his fear of weapons’ failing
To save our city from the siege that ringed it.
But when the luckless Trojan power was broken,
35– ­Getic fields: The Getae were a
Thracian tribe.

. 59 .

25

30

35

40

45

50

BOOK 3
The Thracian joined in Agamemnon’s victory:
He broke with honor, killing Polydorus
To loot the gold. What will that hellish hunger
Not drive a man to do? When I’d stopped quaking,
I told our leaders—first of all my father—
About the omen here and sought advice.
They agreed: from this evil land, defiling
Guest-­friendship, the South Winds should take our fleet.
We gave fresh rites to Polydorus, raising
A large tomb on the mound. His spirits got
Their altar, grim with cypress and dark fillets.
The Trojan women stood with loosened hair.
We brought him cups of warm and frothing milk,
Basins of sacred blood. We roused his spirit
With one last shout, then laid it in the tomb.
When we could trust the sea, and the wind called us
With gentle rustling to the placid deep,
The men massed on the shore and launched the ships.
The port, the land, the cities dipped behind.
“A sacred land lies in the sea, the favorite
Of the Nereids’ mother and Aegean Neptune.
It floated loose until the thankful Archer
Lashed Mykonos and high Gyarus to it:
It could be lived on then, and flout the winds.
Here I now sailed. The bay serenely welcomed
Our weary crews. We hailed Apollo’s town.
King Anius, who was the god’s priest too,

55

60

65

70

75

80

60–61–­
evil land, defiling guest-­ free-­floating island in place in the Cyfriendship: Guests were held to be sac- cladic Islands to reward the Delians for
allowing his mother, Latona, to give
rosanct in the ancient world.
73–­A sacred land: Delos was sacred birth to him and his sister Diana there.
to marine deities, including Doris,
80–­Anius: King of Delos and priest
mother of the Nereids. Apollo fixed the of Apollo.

. 60 .

BOOK 3
Fillets and laurels on his sacred head,
Hurried to meet Anchises, his old friend.
He clasped our hands and took us to his house.
The shrine was built of ancient rock. I prayed,
‘Give us a home, Apollo. We are worn out.
Give refugees from Greeks and cruel Achilles
Enduring city walls; grant us descendants.
Where must we go and settle? Under what guide?
Grant us an omen, Father! Fill our hearts!’
Suddenly, everything appeared to shake:
The door, the laurels, the entire hill.
The secret place lay bare; the tripod roared.
We fell and hid our faces. Now a voice came:
‘Enduring Trojans, where your race was born,
A fertile, loving land will take you back
As nurslings. Seek out your primeval mother.
Aeneas’ sons will rule in every country—
His children’s children through the generations.’
These were the god’s words. Jubilant wild shouting
Broke out. Where was the town, we asked, that Phoebus
Was summoning us back to as we wandered?
My father then considered the traditions.
‘Noblemen, hear what we can hope for now.
Crete, great Jove’s island, stretches in mid-­ocean.
There in Mount Ida’s land our race arose.
Crete has a hundred cities, wealthy empires,
And Teucer, our progenitor, set sail
89–­Father: Apollo’s Delian title was
“begetter.”
92–­tripod: A sacred three-­
legged
stand associated with the oracles of
Apollo.
104–5–­Crete . . . Mount Ida: Jupiter
(Jove) was born on Crete, at the base of
Mount Ida.

85

90

95

100

105

107–­Teucer: Apollo has directed the
Trojans to settle in the land of their ancestors. He means Italy, the original
home of Dardanus, but Anchises thinks
he means Crete, the original home of
Teucer.

. 61 .

BOOK 3
From there—if I remember what they tell—
And found a place to reign. Troy’s citadel
Was not yet built; its people lived in deep vales.
From Crete came Mother Cybele, Corybants
With cymbals, faithful silence for her rites
In Ida’s woods, tame, chariot-­yoked lions.
We need to hurry where the gods direct us.
Give offerings to the winds and sail for Knossos.
It isn’t far. With Jupiter to help us,
The fleet will moor there when the third dawn breaks.’
And then he slaughtered what he owed the gods:
A bull for Neptune, one for bright Apollo,
The good West Wind’s white sheep, the Storm God’s black one.
The rumor came: Idomeneus banished
From his ancestral kingdom, Crete deserted,
Empty of enemies, homes for the taking.
We left the Delian port and skimmed the sea
Past Naxos’ Bacchic ridges, green Reed Island,
Then Olive Island, snow-­white Paros, scatter
Of Cyclades. We threaded shallow roiled straits.
Each sailor fought to do the most. They shouted
For speed to Crete, the country of our fathers.
A fair wind rose behind to waft our vessels

111–­Mother Cybele, Corybants: Cybele, the mother goddess, drove a chariot
pulled by lions; her ecstatic followers
were the Corybants. There is a Mount
Ida in her homeland of Phrygia, near
Troy, as well as one on Crete, so she was
associated with both regions.
115–­Knossos: The principal city of
Crete.
120–­West Wind: The Zephyr.
121–­Idomeneus: The king of Crete

110

115

120

125

130

and enemy of the Trojans. He fought
with the Greeks at Troy and was exiled
on his return home for sacrificing his son
after foolishly promising to sacrifice the
first thing he saw.
125–27–­Naxos’ Bacchic ridges, green
Reed Island . . . Olive Island, snow-­
white Paros . . . Cyclades: They sail
through the island group in the Aegean
known as the Cyclades. The largest,
Naxos, was sacred to Bacchus.

. 62 .

BOOK 3
To where the Curetes lived long ago.
Craving to stay, I founded Pergamum—
A welcome name—and urged my race to love
Their homes and fill the citadels with rooftops.
The ships were on the shore and almost dry,
Marriage and farming occupied the young,
Laws and allotments me; when suddenly
That sky rained wretched rotting sickness on us.
The trees and fields grew only death that year.
We gave our sweet breath up or dragged our lives out.
And then the sterile Dog Star scorched the fields.
Shoots withered, and the sick crops gave no food.
My father urged a crossing back to plead
Once more at Phoebus’ oracle and ask him
When he would grant an end to our exhaustion,
Where we should look for help, where we should go.
“Night had brought sleep to all who live on earth.
The sacred forms of Trojan household gods
That I had rescued from the city’s flames
Appeared before my eyes as I was lying
Asleep. They stood out plainly in the bright light
The moon was pouring through my open window.
They seemed to speak to me and soothe my worry.
‘What the god would have told you at his shrine,
He kindly sends by us, right to your threshold.
When Troy was burned, we soldiered after you.
We crossed the swelling water with your fleet,
And we will raise your children to the stars
And give the wide earth to your city. High walls
131–­Curetes: Priests of the goddess
Cybele.
132–­Pergamum: The citadel of Troy.

135

140

145

150

155

141–­the sterile Dog Star: Sirius, a
star associated with drought, madness,
and the “dog days” of summer.

. 63 .

BOOK 3
For your high gods you’ll need there. Do not shirk
Hard travel to a new home, since Apollo
Did not intend your settling here in Crete.
There is a place Greeks call Hesperia,
An old land, strong in war and rich in loam.
Oenotrians lived there, whose descendants take
Their name, it’s said, from Italus the king.
This is our own home. Dardanus was born here,
And our clan’s founder, Father Iasius.
Wake! Hurry! Go with joy to your old father.
There is no question this time: he must go
To Italy. Jove denies you land in Crete.’
The sight and sound of gods dumbfounded me.
(It was no dream, you see. I recognized
Expressions, garlands, faces there before me,
And my whole body dripped with chilly sweat.)
I leapt from bed and raised a suppliant’s hands
And voice to heaven, poured unwatered wine
Onto the hearth. These rites with joy completed,
I told Anchises all that had transpired.
He saw we had a double origin;
He’d made a fresh mistake about old places.
‘Child, how the destiny of Troy torments you!
Only Cassandra gave us such predictions.
Now I recall she often said our race
Was meant to have “the West” or “Italy.”
But who’d imagine Trojans going there?
And who believed Cassandra in those days?
Have faith in Phoebus—now he sets us right.’
165–66–­Oenotrians . . . Italus: The
Oenotrians were an ancient people of
unknown origin who lived in southern
Italy; Italus was their king.
167–68–­Dardanus . . . Iasius: Dardanus and Iasius, or Iasus, his older

160

165

170

175

180

185

brother, were founding ancestors of the
Trojans.
177–­unwatered wine: Romans diluted their drinking wine with water, but
only pure wine was appropriate to offer
to deities.

. 64 .

BOOK 3
With shouts of triumph all of us obeyed.
We left another home, but some remained.
Now sails unfurled. Light hulls skimmed untold water.
“A long way out, with nothing in our sight
Anywhere but the ocean and the sky,
A blue-­black mass of rain and stormy midnight
Loomed in; the water bristled in the dark wind.
All that colossal surface rose in arcs,
Flinging and strewing us across itself.
The storm clouds muffled day, the soaking night
Hid the sky, fire kept shattering the vapor.
Slammed off our course, we groped through blinding waves.
That sky, said Palinurus, muddled night
With day: he’d lost his way across the sea.
For three long days (we thought—the gloom confused us)
We wandered, and as many starless nights.
On the fourth day at last we saw land rising:
Some distant mountains and a curl of smoke.
We lowered sails. The sailors’ plunging rowing
Raised curls of foam and swept us on the blue.
So I was saved, and reached the Turning Islands,
A Greek name. In the wide Ionian
They are now fixed, and home to grim Celaeno
And other Harpies, who have all been banished
From Phineus’ palace, routed from his banquet.
The fury of the gods has raised no horror,
No plague more vicious from the waves of Styx.
209–13–­
the Turning Islands . . .
Celaeno and other Harpies . . . Phineus’
palace: The Harpies (literally “snatchers”) were woman-­faced birds, sent as
punishment by Jupiter to steal and pollute King Phineus’ banquets. The Argonauts drove them to the Turning Islands

190

195

200

205

210

215

(the Strophades), so named because the
Argonauts were “turned back” there in
their pursuit by the rainbow goddess Iris,
who promised that the Harpies would
leave King Phineus alone.
215–­Styx: A river in the Underworld.

. 65 .

BOOK 3
They have girls’ features, but their stomachs drip
Revolting filth, their hands have claws, their faces
Are always pale with hunger.
We put to land there. Just beyond the harbor,
We saw a sleek herd scattered in a meadow—
Cattle and goats with no one guarding them.
We drew our swords, swarmed in, and called on Jove
And other gods to share our spoils. The curved shore
Filled with our couches as we cooked a feast.
A terrifying swoop out of the mountains:
The Harpies with their clanking wings came screeching
To loot the food. All that they touched was smeared
With filth. We caught their nauseating stench.
In a deep hollow underneath a cliff
Enclosed by trees and bristling shade, we set
Fresh tables and restored our altar fires.
From other lairs and corners of the sky—
A circling, screaming, taloned, snatching horde,
Spreading their dirty drool. I called my friends
To arms, to meet that fiendish breed in war.
Just as I ordered them, they stashed their swords
In grass clumps all around and hid their shields.
Now when the birds plunged, shrieking, down the shore’s arc,
Misenus gave the signal from his lookout
With his bronze horn. My men rushed in to maim
These hideous seabirds with their swords—strange battle.
No one was strong enough to strike a wound
Through those hard plumes. Stampeded to the sky,
They left half-­eaten loot and sickening slime.
Celaeno, though, ill-­omened prophet, perched
On a high cliff and shouted out these words:
‘Trojans, on top of slaughtering our cattle,

230–­The line is thought to be spurious.

220

225

230

235

240

245

239–­Misenus: A trumpeter; he reappears in book 6.

. 66 .

BOOK 3
You take up war against the blameless Harpies
And try to drive us from our rightful kingdom?
Store in your hearts the prophecy that Phoebus
Gave me. It came from the almighty father;
I, greatest of the Harpies, now reveal it.
You’ll call the wind to sail to Italy.
When you arrive, you’ll find an open harbor,
But walls will never ring your promised city
Until this crime against us and your hunger
Drive you to grind your tables in your jaws.’
She now took wing and fled into the woods.
My comrades’ blood froze. Overcome with fear,
They told me to abandon arms and plead
With prayers and promises to be let go,
Whether these things were gods or loathsome birds.
On the shore my father stretched his hands out, calling
High powers, and announcing their due rites.
‘Gods, block their threats! Hold this disaster back!
We serve you—save us!’ He had mooring ropes
Torn free, and sheets let out. Now the South Wind
Bellied the sails. Now on the foaming waves
We fled, winds and the pilot guiding us.
Wooded Zacynthus rose amid the waves,
Dulichium, Samē, Neritos’ steep rocks.
Ithaca’s crags passed by, where once Laertes
Was king; we cursed Ulysses’ motherland.
The misty peak of Leucata appeared—
Apollo’s shrine, which sailors hold in awe.
257–­
to grind your tables in your
jaws: Celaeno’s prophecy is fulfilled at
7.109–26.
269–­the pilot: Palinurus.
270–72–­Zacynthus . . . Dulichium,
Samē, Neritos . . . Ithaca: Greek islands
in the Ionian Sea. Samē is also known as
Samos.

250

255

260

265

270

275

272–73–­
Ithaca . . . Laertes . . .
Ulysses: Ulysses was the king of Ithaca;
Laertes was his father.
274–75–­Leucata . . . which sailors
hold in awe: A promontory with a
temple of Apollo constructed on a dangerous rock.

. 67 .

BOOK 3
We dropped our anchors at the little town,
Exhausted. All along the beach our ships stood.
Beyond hope, we had gained a place on dry land.
We cleansed ourselves for Jove, burned promised gifts,
Held Trojan ritual games on Actium’s shore.
My comrades stripped and wrestled in the old way,
Dripping with oil, relieved at their escape
Through all those cities of Greek enemies.
Meanwhile the sun passed through the great year’s circuit;
The waves grew sharp in icy winter’s North Winds.
The curved bronze shield great Abas’ arm once held
I nailed outside the gate above this verse:
‘Aeneas won these arms from conquering Greeks.’
My orders: man the oars and leave the harbor.
With zeal they lashed the sea and swept across it.
Quickly, Phaeacia’s cloud-­high bastion dipped
From sight. We traced Epirus’ shores and landed
At the Chaonian port of high Buthrotum.
“A rumor—unbelievable—possessed us:
Helenus, Priam’s son, reigned in the Greek towns,
Succeeding Pyrrhus; and Andromache
Had found in him her second Trojan husband!
280–­Actium’s shore: North of Leucata; location of the decisive naval battle
in 31 BCE through which Augustus (then
Octavian) secured power by defeating
Marc Antony and Cleopatra.
286–­Abas: One of Aeneas’ companions.
291–­Phaeacia: A legendary location
from Homer’s Odyssey, ruled by the benevolent King Alcinous.
292–­Epirus: A region in northwestern Greece.

280

285

290

295

293–­Chaonian . . . Buthrotum: Buthrotum is the Greek city ruled by the Trojan refugees Helenus and Andromache.
Helenus names part of it after his Trojan
friend Chaon.
295–97–­Helenus . . . Andromache
. . . second Trojan husband: Pyrrhus,
the son of Achilles, took Hector’s wife,
Andromache, as a slave after the sack of
Troy. According to Vergil, Pyrrhus gifted
her to another Trojan captive, Helenus.

. 68 .

BOOK 3
I was amazed and eager in my heart
To question him about these strange events.
My fleet was in the harbor; I went inland.
By chance Andromache was in the woods
Beside the river ‘Simoïs,’ offering
The ritual food and gifts to Hector’s ashes,
To call his spirit at the hollow green mound
And the two altars sacred to her tears.
She saw me coming in my Trojan armor
And froze, beside herself, stunned by the portent.
As she stood gazing, all warmth left her body.
She fainted. Finally, she could speak, and said,
‘Goddess’ son, is it you I see—alive?
You’re really here—with news? But if you’ve lost
The kind light, where is Hector?’ Now her tears gushed,
Her wailing filled that place; I was distressed,
And as she raved, I struggled with a few words:
‘I am alive, through all of my ordeals.
Don’t doubt your eyes.
Andromache, you were the wife of Hector.
How far you fell! But has some worthy fate
Now caught you? Or is Pyrrhus still your husband?’
She bent her head and whispered this to me:
‘Lucky beyond us all was Priam’s daughter,
Compelled to die beside a hostile grave
Beneath Troy’s high walls. No lots drawn for her,
No conqueror’s bed to take her prisoner!
Hauled past remote seas once my homeland burned,
I bore the insults of Achilles’ son.

302–­“Simoïs”: Helenus has named
the river after the one beside Troy, as he
has done with other place names.

300

305

310

315

320

325

321–­Priam’s daughter: Polyxena, sacrificed by the Greeks to the dead Achilles.

. 69 .

BOOK 3
I had a child in slavery. Pyrrhus, chasing
A Spartan bride, Hermione, Leda’s grandchild,
Gave me to Helenus, another slave.
Orestes, Fury-­hounded for his own crime,
And full of rage when Pyrrhus stole his bride,
Caught him and killed him at his father’s altar.
And at his death a portion of his kingdom
Passed rightfully to Helenus, who named
This land Chaonian, for Trojan Chaon,
And put a tower, ‘Ilium,’ on that ridge.
What wind, what fate has set your course, what god
Drove you here to our shores, without your knowing?
Your boy Ascanius still drinks the air?
He was at Troy with you—
And does he miss his mother, who is gone?
And do his father and his uncle Hector
Inspire him for his legacy of courage?’
She poured this out, with tears and useless wailing—
Then Priam’s son, heroic Helenus,
Came from the town, with plenty of attendants.
He knew us, and with joy he led us homeward,
And every word he spoke was bathed with tears.
Now I approached a little Troy, a tower

328–31–­
A Spartan bride . . . his
bride: These events are described in
Euripides’ tragedy Andromache: Pyrrhus
marries Hermione, daughter of the Spartan king Menelaus and Helen, daughter
of Leda. But Hermione was already betrothed to Orestes (see 4.471–73n), who
slays Pyrrhus at Delphi.
332–­at his father’s altar: An echo
of Pyrrhus’ killing of Priam at Troy at
2.550–55.

330

335

340

345

335– ­Chaon: A Trojan warrior, the
friend or brother of Helenus.
336–­“Ilium”: Another name for
Troy; see 302n.
339–­
Your boy Ascanius: Andromache is thinking of her young son
Astyanax, killed after the sack of Troy.
341–42–­his mother . . . uncle Hector:
Aeneas’ wife, Creusa, died at Troy.
Hector was her brother.

. 70 .

BOOK 3
Shaped like the great one, and a dry stream, ‘Xanthus.’
I kissed the threshold of a ‘Scaean Gate.’
My Trojans too enjoyed their kindred city.
The king in his broad vestibule received them,
And in his central hall they poured libations,
Holding the wine bowls. Food was set on gold plates.
“A day passed, then another. Breezes called
Our sails. The South Wind puffed to swell the canvas,
And I approached the prophet, questioning:
‘Trojan-­born voice of gods! To you are known
The power, the Clarian bay trees, and the tripod
Of Phoebus; stars and birdcalls, signs from birds’ flight:
Tell me (since all the rites have promised me
A good voyage, and the gods’ will urged me on
To make for Italy, so far away—
Except Celaeno spoke of some strange evil
To come, a fearful anger that would bring
A loathsome hunger), what are my chief dangers?
What can I do to overcome my trials?’
Helenus slaughtered sacramental heifers,
Begged the gods’ favor, freed his sacred head
Of wreaths and led me, cautious at the great
And holy presence, into Phoebus’ house,
And from his priestly mouth came this foretelling:
‘Son of the goddess, certainly gods guide you
Across the sea. The king of them allotted
350–­“Xanthus”: Named after a river
beside Troy.
351–­“Scaean Gate”: Named after the
landmark at Troy.
358–­the prophet: Helenus.
360–61–­the Clarian bay trees, and
the tripod of Phoebus: Bay (or laurel)

350

355

360

365

370

375

was sacred to Apollo. For the tripod, see
3.92n.
361–­
signs from birds’ flight: Au‑
gury, the study of the flight of birds to
determine the will of the gods.
375–­The king of them: Jupiter.

. 71 .

BOOK 3
This fate, this turning wheel of incident.
These words will help you cross the unknown seas
In safety, clear to an Italian haven.
Some things that I could say the Fates have hidden;
Some Juno, Saturn’s daughter, holds inside me.
First, you think Italy is close. In planning
To gain its harbors easily, you’re wrong.
The road that is no road runs by long shorelines.
In the Sicilian waves you’ll bend your oars
And cross the salty plain near Italy
By Circe’s island and the lakes of hell
Before a safe land lets you found a city.
Keep carefully in mind the signs I speak of:
Troubled at heart, you’ll find a huge sow lying
With thirty piglets by a distant river
Under the holm oaks. On her bed of dark ground
She will be white, white youngsters suckling her.
Your city will be there, and your sure respite.
And as for eating tables, calm your terror.
Follow fate’s path and ask Apollo’s help.
Avoid the nearer coast of Italy,
The beaches washed by tides we share, since evil

384–­Sicilian waves: Aeneas will sail
around the island of Sicily.
386–­Circe’s island: Aeaea, legendary
home of the sorceress Circe in the Odyssey. They will sail by her at 7.10.
386:–­the lakes of hell: Lake Avernus,
traditionally located at the entrance of
the Underworld. See 6.238 and 6.242n.
389–90–­
a huge sow lying with

380

385

390

395

thirty piglets: The prophecy is repeated
at 8.42–45 and fulfilled at 8.81–83.
392–­white: “White” (alba) refers to
Alba Longa, the city that will be founded
by Ascanius in Italy.
394– ­eating tables: Celaeno made
this prophecy at 3.247–57; see 3.257n.
396–­the nearer coast of Italy: That
is, the eastern coast, nearer Greece.

. 72 .

BOOK 3
Greeks live in every fort: the Locrians
Have built Narycium’s walls; Idomeneus
Of Lyctos occupies Sallentian flatlands;
Small Petelia can rely on walls built
By Philoctetes, Meliboea’s chieftain.
Once moored across the sea, when you are giving
Your promised gifts at newbuilt shoreline altars,
Hide your head, drape it in your purple clothing,
So that amid the flames of sacred rites
You see no enemy and spoil the omens.
Let your companions hold to this—and you too,
And your sons’ sons: keep pure in this observance.
The wind will take you on to Sicily;
Pelorus will disclose its narrow gap.
Aim for the left shore, circle in from far out;
Avoid the land and water on the right.
They say some cataclysm split these places.
(Time holds within it such tremendous changes.)
It was a single place once, but the waves
Burst through the middle, splitting Italy
From Sicily, to sever farms and cities
By the new shores and narrow, sweeping tides.
Scylla lurks on the right, vicious Charybdis
On the left; its vortex sucks down vast cascades
Sheer to the bottom three times every day
And spouts them back to strike the stars with froth.
Scylla, down in her secret, murky cave,
398–402–­the Locrians . . . chieftain:
Various Greek enemies from the Trojan War. The Locrians were the troops
of Ajax the Lesser; on Idomeneus, see
3.121n. The Greek warrior Philoctetes
was stranded by the Greeks because of
the rotten smell of his wound.
405–­Hide your head: A forerunner

400

405

410

415

420

of the Roman custom of covering one’s
head when conducting a sacrifice.
411–­Pelorus:–­The northeastern tip
of Sicily.
420–­Scylla . . . Charybdis: Dangers
on either side of the Strait of Messina
encountered by Odysseus (Ulysses) in
Odyssey 12. See 1.200–201n.

. 73 .

BOOK 3
Thrusts out her mouths, drags vessels onto rocks.
She’s human—she’s a girl with lovely breasts
Above the waist, below a gruesome sea beast;
Wolves at her belly end in dolphin tails.
Better to double back and make your slow way
Around Pachynum, Sicily’s far headland,
Than glimpse disgusting Scylla in her huge lair
And hear her sea-­blue dogs make boulders echo.
And if I can be trusted as a prophet,
And know my art, and if the god inspires me,
Then above all hear this, child of the goddess,
An urgency I can’t repeat enough:
Plead with and pray to mighty Juno’s godhead;
Win the queen over with your suppliant gifts
And cheerful promises: at last she’ll let you
Leave Sicily for Italy—your triumph.
When you reach Cumae, near the sacred lakes
And the deep-­sighing forest of Avernus,
You’ll see the raving Sibyl in a deep cave.
She chants the future, and with special signs
Marks it on leaves. The virgin puts these verses
In sequence and then locks them in her cave.
They stay there motionless, in perfect order.
But when a hinge turns, and a tender breeze
Falls on that flimsy foliage and disturbs it,
She doesn’t chase its flutters through her cavern,
Or link the lines back in their proper order.
430–­Pachynum: A promontory on
the southeastern side of Sicily. Helenus
suggests that Aeneas go around Sicily
rather than risk encountering Scylla and
Charybdis in the Strait of Messina.
438–­Win the queen over: Juno remains hostile to Aeneas until the end of
book 12.

425

430

435

440

445

450

441–43–­Cumae . . . Avernus . . .
Sibyl: Near modern Naples, Cumae was
the home of Apollo’s prophetess Sibyl,
who wrote her prophecies on oak leaves.
These events will be described in book 6.

. 74 .

BOOK 3
Disgusted, people leave, forgoing counsel.
You must not brood about the time you spend there,
Though your friends grumble, though your goal insists
On canvas bellying across the deep.
Approach the seer, beg to know your future
From her own chanting mouth, by her goodwill:
She’ll tell of tribes that live there, wars to come,
And hardships to endure or to avoid.
Revere her, and she’ll grant a good voyage back.
But this is all that I’m allowed to tell you.
Go then, raise Troy to heaven with your strivings.’
After the augur spoke these loving words,
He had the gifts, heavy with their carved ivory
And gold, brought to our ships. He packed our hulls
With silver bars and cauldrons from Dodona.
A corselet, triple-­layered in gold chain mail,
And splendid helmet, topped with flowing plumes,
Had once been Pyrrhus’; and my father got
Special gifts. Pilots, horses were provided,
Fresh rowers, and new armor for my comrades.
Meanwhile, Anchises had the sails refitted—
Nothing must keep us when the wind was right.
Helenus spoke to him with great respect:
‘Anchises, fit to marry lofty Venus,
Troy fell twice, twice the gods who love you saved you.
There is your western land. Spread sails and seize it.
Take care, though: skirt the near side, since the far side
Alone is opened for you by Apollo.
Go now! You’re blessed with this devoted son.

466–­Dodona: The oldest oracle of
Zeus (Jupiter), located in Epirus, near
Buthrotum, in northwestern Greece.
476–­
Troy fell twice: Hercules had
sacked Troy before the Trojan War, after

455

460

465

470

475

480

the Trojan king Laomedon refused to
compensate him as promised for killing
a sea monster plaguing the city.
480–­this devoted son: Another reference to Aeneas’ pietas.

. 75 .

BOOK 3
I mustn’t waste the rising South Wind’s time.’
Andromache, as gracious as her husband,
Heaped on more gifts, in grief at our departure:
Clothing she had embroidered with gold yarn,
And for Ascanius a Trojan cloak.
‘Take what my hands worked and remember me.
Andromache, the wife of Hector, pledges
Her love this way. Receive your family’s last gifts—
You, the sole image of Astyanax
Left to me, with his hands and his expressions
And eyes; he’d be at boyhood’s end, like you.’
As I was leaving, tears rose in my eyes:
‘Be happy, since your destiny is finished.
We are called on to one and then another.
You have your peace: no ocean field to plow,
No land to seek that falls away from you
Forever. You’ve made images of Xanthus
And Troy with your own hands—with better omens,
I hope, than Troy, and out of reach of Greeks.
And if I ever come to Tiber’s country
And see the ramparts granted to my people,
Italy and Epirus at its border—
Which share a history, and a founder too,
Dardanus—will unite in heart. We’ll make
A single Troy. Our heirs must see to this.’
“We sailed out. Circling the Ceraunian headland
Gave us the quickest voyage to Italy.
The sun plunged down. The mountains shadowed over.
On the dry beach—warm, yearned-­for earth—we drew
Lots for the next day’s rowing, then dispersed,
500–­Tiber’s country: Italy.
502–­Epirus: See 3.292n.

485

490

495

500

505

510

506–­the Ceraunian headland: The
Ceraunians are a coastal mountain range
in Albania, north of Greece.

. 76 .

BOOK 3
Sprawled, rested. Fresh sleep poured through tired limbs.
The Hours had not yet driven Night halfway
Around, when zealous Palinurus rose,
Ears sifting air to test for any wind.
He traced the still sky’s gliding constellations:
The Rainy Ones, the Oxen and the Great Bear,
And in the south, Orion with gold armor.
Seeing the proper signs in limpid heaven,
He blared a signal from the stern. We broke camp
And spread our wings of sails and ventured out.
Now blushing Dawn had chased the stars away;
We glimpsed dim hills—there, just above the sea,
Was Italy. Achates gave the first shout,
Then the whole company cheered: ‘Italy!’
Father Anchises wreathed a giant bowl,
Filled it with wine, and on the looming stern
Stood calling on the gods:
‘Deities who rule land and sea and storms,
Be gracious, send a wind, make our way easy.’
The breezes strengthened, and a harbor opened;
Then on the heights we saw Minerva’s shrine.
They furled the sails and turned the prows toward shore.
Waves from the east have made a bow-­shaped harbor.
In front sharp rocks are sprayed with briny water.
On either side stone spires with their low arms
Form twin walls, and the shrine is safely inland.
Four snow-­white horses, our first omen seen,
Ranged browsing on the plain. My father spoke:
‘New land, you’ll bring us war, since horses go

516–17–­The Rainy Ones, the Oxen
. . . the Great Bear . . . Orion: The constellations the Pleiades, Boötes, and Ursa
Major (Big Dipper or Plow); the scene is
modeled on Odyssey 5.

515

520

525

530

535

531–­Minerva’s shrine: Castrum Mi‑
nervae, in Calabria, Italy.

. 77 .

BOOK 3
To war in armor—these beasts threaten war.
They can submit, though, and be trained to draw
A chariot beneath a yoke of concord;
So peace may come.’ Cheering, we disembarked.
We called on Pallas first, shield-­clanging godhead.
Trojan clothes hooded us before her altars.
As Helenus had urged this most of all,
We honored Argive Juno, offering
Gifts in the flames. Our vows fulfilled, we hurried
To point the sail-­draped yardarms out to sea.
This was a land of Greeks, which made us leery.
Tarentum’s gulf!—where Hercules (the tale says)
Visited. Facing it rose Juno’s temple,
Caulon’s fort, and ship-­wrecking Scylaceum.
Above the far flood rose Sicilian Etna.
We heard the sea-­struck rocks in their vast groaning
Already, and the shattered voice of breakers.
The shallows leapt, the sand ran through their seething.
My father shouted, ‘That must be Charybdis—
Helenus warned us of those crags and grim rocks.
Friends, save us! All together at the oars!’
The men obeyed, and Palinurus led,
Wrenching his creaking prow out toward the sea.
The whole fleet rowed and turned their sails to follow.
The arching billow heaved up to the sky,
Then hollowed out: we sank as deep as hell.
Three times the caverns at the cliff ’s base thundered.
Three times the foam shot out and soaked the stars.
Sun and wind left us now. Exhausted, lost,

544–­Pallas: Minerva.
547–­Argive Juno: Juno was the
patron goddess of Argos, a city in Greece.
551–­Tarentum’s gulf . . . Hercules:
Tarentum, located in the arch of the

540

545

550

555

560

565

“boot” of Italy, was said to have been
founded by Hercules.
552–54–­Juno’s temple, Caulon’s fort
. . . Scylaceum . . . Etna: Locales on the
eastern coast of Sicily.

. 78 .

BOOK 3
We drifted to a coast, to Cyclops country.
The harbor, blocked from wind, is broad and peaceful,
But Etna’s gales of rubble roar beside it.
Sometimes a dark cloud blasts clear up to heaven,
A pitch-­black smoky whirlwind ringed with white ash:
Its swarms of hurtling fire flick the stars.
Sometimes it vomits crags and mountain entrails
Into the air, or masses melted stone
From its deep roots and, with a groan, boils over.
The Giant, lightning-­scorched Enceladus,
They say, is pinned beneath enormous Etna,
Which breathes its fires out of shattered forges,
And when he turns, exhausted, all the island
Trembles and roars, and thick smoke masks the sky.
Cowering all night in the woods, we suffered
Inhuman horrors, noises out of nowhere.
Neither the stars’ flames nor the moon were showing.
The heights of heaven lost all incandescence;
The hours of night were buried in dark cloud.
The day was rising, and the dawn appeared.
“Aurora drove the shadows from the damp sky
When a strange form burst on us from the forest:
A pitiful, starved heap of dirt and rags.
A suppliant, his hands out, he approached.
We stared. His long beard straggled, he was filthy,
Thorns pinned his clothes. But he was Greek, we saw:
A past invader, in his country’s armor.
He’d seen our Trojan clothes and arms already
And halted for a little while in terror—

569– ­Cyclops country: The region
around Mount Etna.
578–­Enceladus: One of the Giants,
who rebelled against the Olympians and

570

575

580

585

590

595

were punished by being chained under
mountains (here, the volcano Mount
Etna).
589–­Aurora: The dawn goddess.

. 79 .

BOOK 3
Then he came rushing forward to the shore,
Weeping and pleading: ‘By the stars, the gods,
This sky that gives us shining air to breathe,
Take me on board, to any country, Trojans.
That is enough. I sailed in that Greek fleet,
And I attacked your homes—yes, I admit it.
If my crime is too great, then scatter me
Across the waves and sink me in the vast deep.
Give me the joy of death at human hands!’
He clutched my knees, in an unyielding grovel.
I strove to draw from him his name and lineage,
And then the story of his misery.
Anchises quickly gave the youth his right hand,
A ready sign of friendship, lending courage.
At last he let his terror go and spoke:
‘I’m Achaemenides. Luckless Ulysses
Took me to Troy: my father, Adamastus,
Was poor—I wish I’d stayed in poverty.
My friends forgot me in their fear and left me
In the Cyclops’ monstrous cavern when they stole
Out of his savage door. That huge, dark house
Is fouled with gory food. He towers, striking
The stars. Gods, rid the world of such a plague!
Who’d want to speak to him or look at him?
He eats poor human entrails and black blood.
In the middle of his cave I saw him lying:
He put his giant hand on two of us
And smashed them on a rock; the cavern’s entrance
Ran with sprayed blood. I saw him chewing bodies

613–­Achaemenides: Not mentioned
in previous literature and probably an
invention of Vergil.

600

605

610

615

620

625

617–­the Cyclops’ monstrous cavern:
A reference to Odyssey 9, in which Odysseus (Ulysses) and his men encounter
the Cyclops Polyphemus.

. 80 .

BOOK 3
Black with their own gore, while their limbs still quivered.
He paid. Ulysses acted like the hero
He was, and took a great, defiant risk.
The Cyclops, stuffed with food and sunk in wine,
Stretched his great length across the cave and laid down
His lolling head, and slept, and vomited
Blood, wine, and gory fragments. We beseeched
The holy powers, drew lots for tasks, and swarmed
Around him. With a sharpened spike we pierced
The single eye beneath his brutal brow—
Sun-­big, big as a shield an Argive carries.
The joy, when we avenged our comrades’ ghosts!
But run, poor people! Slash your mooring cables!
Get away!
As huge as Polyphemus in his cave,
Shutting his woolly herds in pens for milking,
A hundred Cyclopes are on the loose
On this curved shore and wander in these mountains.
And now the third moon fills its horns with light,
Tally of time endured deep in these woods
Among beasts’ dens. From cliffs I see the monsters.
I tremble when I hear their steps and voices.
Trees give me miserable fodder: berries,
And stony cornels, and I pull at roots.
Yours are the first ships I have known to land here
In all my watching—and at any price,
I submit, to escape this evil race.
Grant any death you like, and take my spirit.’
Just as he finished, we saw Polyphemus
Himself, high on a hill among his herd,
His great bulk moving toward the shore he knew—
A massive, hideous monster, though now blinded.
A pine log led his hand and braced his steps.
The woolly ewes, his sole delight and comfort,
Followed him.

. 81 .

630

635

640

645

650

655

660

BOOK 3
He waded to the deep and level water
To wash the scooped-­out socket’s running matter,
Grinding his teeth and groaning. Now he strode
Far out, but no waves wet his towering flanks.
Away we scrambled with the suppliant,
Poor man. With stealth, we cut the ropes and rowed
Flat out, churning the surface frantically.
He wrenched his footsteps toward the sound we made,
But couldn’t get his grasping hands on us—
We were too fast on the Ionian currents.
His roar shook every wave on that wide sea;
Inland, through Italy it sent its terror,
And bellowed in the arching caves of Etna.
All of the Cyclops tribe, roused by the noise,
Ran from the woods and hills to fill the beach.
We saw the clan of Etna standing there,
Each with a cloud-­high head and one wild eye—
Grim council—like the oaks that fill the ether,
Or cone-­hung cypresses; like mountain forests
Of Jove, like groves in which Diana hunts.
Our terror drove us headlong—anywhere.
We let the sails out for the wind to take.
Helenus warned us of the narrow way
By Scylla and Charybdis: death crowds both sides.
We chose to set the canvas for retreat.
A north wind from Pelorus’ narrow cape
Drove us around Pantagia’s rocky gates—
The bay of Megara—low-­lying Thapsus.
671–­Ionian: The Ionian Sea is the
stretch of water between Italy and
Greece.
681–­Diana: The goddess of hunting.
688–89–­
Pantagia’s . . . Thap­
sus: Aeneas’ most direct route would
be through the Strait of Messina (see

665

670

675

680

685

3.420n, 3.430n), but he avoids it because
of the dangers posed by Scylla and Charybdis. Instead, he sails around Sicily,
passing a number of Sicilian locales
along the way, including the mouth of
the river Pantagia.

. 82 .

BOOK 3
Hapless Ulysses’ Achaemenides
Pointed out shores he’d skimmed in coming there.
Wave-­washed Plemyrium confronts an island
Stretched across a Sicilian bay. The ancients
Called it Ortygia, land of Arethusa,
The spring to which the Alpheus River tunneled
From Elis, as they say, to blend in this sea.
We prayed to local gods, as we’d been told to,
And sailed on past Helorus’ fertile wetlands,
And grazed the jutting, high Pachynian cliffs.
Far off rose Camerina—fate forbade
Moving it—and the fields outlying Gela,
A city named for roaring Laughter River;
Steep Acragas then showed huge walls far off—
Once, long ago, it bred high-­hearted horses.
We passed palm-­filled Selinus with a fair wind
And picked through Lilybaeum’s vicious shallows
And found a port, and grief, at Drepanum.
There I lost my consoler for each mishap
And care, Anchises, whom so many storms
Had hounded. Best of fathers, you were worn out
And left me, after all I saved you from.
From all dire things foretold by Helenus
And grim Celaeno, this one grief was missing,

694–96–­Ortygia . . . Arethusa . . .
Elis: The Sicilian spring Arethusa was
said to originate in the Peloponnese. According to myth the nymph Arethusa,
pursued by the river god Alpheus, fled
under the sea to Sicily. Alpheus followed
and their waters merged at Ortygia, near
Syracuse.

690

695

700

705

710

699–707–­
Pachynian cliffs . . .
Drepanum: Starting from Cape Pachynus, the southeastern tip of Sicily, Aeneas
sails along the southern coast and up the
western side to the port of Drepanum,
the northwestern corner of the island.
He is ready to turn in toward Italy when
Juno’s storm sends him southwest to
Carthage on the African coast.

. 83 .

BOOK 3
And this I suffered last in my long travels.
It was from there god brought me to your shore.”
So, with the crowd engrossed, Father Aeneas
Told of the fate the gods sent, and his travels.
At last he reached the end and sat in silence.

715–­to your shore: Vergil returns the
frame to Dido and the Carthaginians.

. 84 .

715
