While, far away, all this was happening,
Iris came earthward, sent by Saturn’s daughter
To Turnus, who was seated in a hollow,
The sanctum of his ancestor Pilumnus.
Rosy-­lipped Thaumas’ child addressed him: “Turnus,
Circling time, on its own, brings you an answer
To prayers—no god would venture it: Aeneas
Has left behind his fort, his fleet, his comrades
For Palatine Evander’s kingly home.
He’s ventured on to Corythus’ far cities
To gather Lydian farmers and equip them.
Why waver? Call for chariots and horses.
Don’t hold back: overrun the camp and take it.”
On poised wings, she rose skyward, and a great arc
Was cut beneath the clouds as she retreated.
The young man knew her, and he raised both hands
To heaven, calling these words after her:
“Iris, great splendor of the sky, who sent you
Down through the clouds? Why is the air so bright
Just now? I see the sky split in the middle—
Stars wander at its height. Whoever’s great signs
Call me to arms, I follow.” He went down
To take up water from the current’s surface
And overwhelmed the gods above with prayers.

2–­Iris: The rainbow goddess.
4–­Pilumnus: An Italian god and
grandfather of Turnus.
5–­Thaumas: A sea deity.

5

10

15

20

10–11–­Corythus . . . Lydian farmers:
The Etruscans were said to come from
Cortona in Lydia (Asia Minor).

. 229 .

BOOK 9
Now the whole army crossed the open plains,
Wealthy in horses, gold, embroidery;
Messapus marshaled the front ranks, the sons
Of Tyrrhus had the rear, the center Turnus,
Wheeling with weapons, taller by a head—
As the calm Ganges swells from the infusions
Of seven smooth streams; as the Nile’s rich floods
Ebb from the plains and hide beneath the banks.
The Trojans suddenly saw black dust massing
Far away, darkness welling on the plain.
From a high mound Caïcus gave the warning:
“Citizens, what’s that murky roiling round thing?
Quick—bring your swords and spears and man the walls.
They’re here!” The Trojans hollered and sought shelter
Through every gate, and crowded on the ramparts;
Such were the parting orders of Aeneas,
The able general: that if something happened,
They must not take the field and risk a battle,
But stay on bastions and defensive mounds.
Though shame and anger counseled them to fight,
They shut the gates, as ordered, armed themselves,
And braced for the attack in hollow towers.
Turnus, with twenty chosen horsemen trailing,
Flew past his slow front line and reached the town,
To its alarm. He rode a dappled horse
From Thrace, and wore a gold, red-­crested helmet.
“Young men, who’ll join me in the first assault?
Look—” And he whirled his spear up through the air
To start the fight; he loomed, he plunged ahead.

29–­The line is thought to be spurious.
30–31–­
Ganges . . . seven smooth
streams: The Romans believed the River
Ganges split into seven channels.

25

30

35

40

45

50

31–­Nile’s rich floods: Every year the
Nile flooded its banks in the summer,
then receded.

. 230 .

BOOK 9
His men took up the shout—they followed him
With chilling roars, contemptuous of the Trojans.
Why not fight man to man, out on the level?
Why hunch inside? The agitated general
Rode back and forth but couldn’t find a gap;
As a wolf prowls outside a crowded sheepfold
And growls at every chink. The wind and rain
Of midnight lash him. Lambs beneath their mothers
Huddle and bleat and bleat. Though he can’t reach them,
He lunges in wild rage, lashed on by hunger
Grown into frenzy, by his blood-­starved throat.
So the Rutulian scanned the camp’s defenses,
Seared to the bone by anger and frustration.
How could he break in? What assault would scatter
The Trojans out across the level ground?
Their fleet lay snug, moored right beside the camp,
Closed in by earthworks and the flowing river.
There he struck, calling to his cheering comrades,
“Torches!”—and hectically snatched burning pine.
They set to work, with Turnus there to goad them.
Soon all the troops laid hold of sooty weapons,
Looting the fires; pitchy smoky light spread,
And Vulcan sent the sparks clear up to heaven.
Muse, say what god it was that saved the Trojans,
Beating the fierce flames from their ships. The ancients
Vouched for the story, and it still endures.
Back when Aeneas, high on Phrygian Ida,
Began to build a fleet to sail the deep,
The Berecynthian mother of the gods,
They say, told great Jove, “You’re Olympus’ lord,
So grant what your dear mother begs from you.
82–­
Berecynthian mother of the
gods: Cybele; Berecynthus is a mountain in her native Phrygia.

. 231 .

55

60

65

70

75

80

BOOK 9
For many years I had a cherished forest
On a high peak, a place of offerings,
Shadowed with black pitch pines and maple trees.
Gladly I gave it to the youthful Trojan
Who had to have a fleet, but now I’m anxious.
Free me from fear: grant what your mother begs,
That whirlwinds never shatter and submerge them
On any voyage. Please—they are from my mountains.”
Her son, who guides creation’s stars, replied,
“Mother, what favor have you asked of fate?
Could it be right for ships a mortal made
To last forever? Should Aeneas’ perils
Bring him no risk? What god has so much power?
But when they’ve done their work and reached a harbor
In Italy, each that survived the sea
To bring the Trojan chieftain to Laurentum
I’ll strip of earthly form and make a goddess
Of the great ocean, like the Nereids Doto
And Galatea breasting through the sea foam.”
He swore this by the Styx, his brother’s stream—
Black eddies, pitch that seethes along the banks.
He nodded, and Olympus shook. The Fates
Had rounded out the time; the promised day
Had come. The torches flung by Turnus roused
The Mother to defend her sacred ships.
A strange light flashed; a great cloud from the east
Appeared to dart across the sky, with bands
Of devotees. A fearsome voice fell earthward
And filled the Trojan and Rutulian ranks:
“Don’t take up arms or anxiously defend
My ships. It will be sooner granted Turnus
To burn the sea than holy pines. Be free,
102–­Nereids: Sea nymphs.
104–­
his brother’s stream: Pluto,

85

90

95

100

105

110

115

Jupiter’s brother, is god of the Underworld.

. 232 .

BOOK 9
Sea goddesses, my daughters: I command it.”
Right away, on their own, they broke their moorings
And headed for the bottom, dolphinlike.
Though bronze-­prowed ships a moment earlier
Had stood along the shore, girls’ bodies rose
And skimmed the sea—it was a miracle.
This staggered the Rutulians, and Messapus
Himself took flight behind his rearing team.
The Tiber, roaring, pulled its stream upriver.
But cocksure Turnus’ nerve held even then.
He stung his friends to action with this speech:
“These signs are for the Trojans. Jove himself
Arrived before our fire and spears, and tore
Their old support from them. The sea is closed now.
They can’t get out, with that part of creation
Taken away, the land ours, armed Italians
In thousands here. The holy oracles
These easterners allege don’t frighten me.
The fates and Venus have their due. The Trojans
Landed in fertile Italy. My fate
Is slashing this vile race away. My wife
Is stolen. Not just Atreus’ sons suffered;
Not just Mycenae took up righteous arms.
‘Troy fell once—that’s enough.’ Their crime before this
Should be enough. By now they ought to loathe
All women! For their courage they rely
On palisades and ditches that delay
Death by mere moments. But they saw Troy’s walls
Collapse in flames, though Neptune was the builder.
Which of you picked troops is prepared to splinter

137–­My wife: In his indignation Turnus refers to his fiancée, Lavinia, as his
wife.
138–39–­Atreus’ sons . . . Mycenae:

120

125

130

135

140

145

Agamemnon, king of Mycenae, and
Menelaus, commanders of the Greeks,
who sacked Troy to retrieve Menelaus’
wife, Helen, abducted by Paris.

. 233 .

BOOK 9
The walls and swarm the quaking camp with me?
A thousand ships or Vulcan’s arms, who needs them?
They’ve found Etruscan allies—good. They’ve got
No sneaking tricks at night to fear from us,
As when Athena’s temple guards were slaughtered.
We won’t be lurking in a horse’s belly!
I’ll ring their walls with fire—in open daylight.
They won’t mistake us for the Greeks, whom Hector
Held back for ten years—no, I’ll set them straight.
But now the day is past the time for battle.
In what is left, be cheerful—you’ve done well.
Eat, rest, since there’s a fight to come, believe me.”
Messapus’ duty was to block the gates
With sentries and surround the wall with watch fires.
For the patrol, fourteen Rutulian captains
Were chosen, each to lead a hundred men
Arrayed in purple crests and shining armor.
They scattered to their different tasks or sprawled
Across the grass and drank their wine from bronze cups.
Fires formed a single glow. The watchmen gambled
Throughout the sleepless night.
Armed Trojans watched them from their walls above.
They anxiously checked gates and—still in armor—
Built gangways and defenses in a network,
Urged on by keen Serestus and Mnestheus:
Father Aeneas had appointed them
Leaders and generals in case of crisis.
The whole force on the walls took turns to guard
The risky posts assigned by lot. One sentry

148–­Vulcan’s arms: The shield of
Achilles, like that of Aeneas, was forged
by Vulcan.

150

155

160

165

170

175

151–­
Athena’s temple guards: Ajax
the Lesser and his soldiers took Athena’s
temple in Troy. The line is thought to be
spurious.

. 234 .

BOOK 9
Was Hyrtacus’ son Nisus, fierce in battle.
Nimble with arrows and a spear, he’d come
From Ida’s hunting grounds to serve Aeneas.
His friend Euryalus was lovelier
Than any other of Aeneas’ fighters.
On his unshaven cheeks were manhood’s first signs.
Love bound these two; they dashed to war together,
And now they shared a picket at the gate.
Nisus asked, “Is it gods who make me want this,
Or do we make our deadly urges gods?
A long time now I’ve thought of taking on
Some fight or other great thing—I’m so restless!
You see these overconfident Rutulians
At scattered glinting campfires. There they sprawl,
Melted by wine. It’s all so quiet. Listen
To what I might do—no, I’ve now decided.
Leaders and all, the whole camp wants Aeneas
To know what’s happened and return to help us.
For a pledged prize (to go to you—for me,
Glory’s enough) I’d find a way around
That ridge to reach the fort at Pallanteum.”
Euryalus, though overwhelmed by passion
For praise, was prompt in answering his fierce friend:
“You mean to bar me from this crucial mission,
And face the risk alone? That’s not the way
Opheltes, my war-­hardened father, raised me
In the Greek siege’s horrors, in our struggles
At Troy. And at your side have I been like that
In following Aeneas to fate’s edge?

176–79–­Nisus . . . Euryalus: The
night raid of Nisus and Euryalus that follows is modeled on Odysseus’ (Ulysses’)
similar escapade in Iliad 10. We saw the
two lovers in the footrace at 5.293–361.

196–­Pallanteum: Evander’s
which Aeneas visited in book 8.

. 235 .

180

185

190

195

200

city,

BOOK 9
I have contempt for daylight, and I count
The honor that you aim at worth my life.”
Nisus replied, “I couldn’t rightly doubt you.
So may great Jupiter or any fair judge
Of courage bring me back to you in triumph.
But if a god or mishap steals my life—
A thing you often see in such great dangers—
I’d want you living, since your youth deserves it.
And if my corpse is rescued or bought back,
You’d bury it; if fate denies those rites,
An empty tomb and gifts could honor me.
I wouldn’t bring such sorrow to your mother,
Since she, of all our mothers, followed you,
Indifferent to the walls of great Acestes.”
His friend rebutted this: “Empty excuses!
My mind is made up, nothing’s going to change it.
Let’s hurry”—and he woke the other sentries
To take the watch in turn. They left their post
And side by side strode off to find their king.
All other creatures on the earth were sleeping,
Their cares dissolved, no hardship in their minds.
The Trojan leaders, picked men in their prime,
Were meeting about vital strategy.
What should they do? Who’d bring Aeneas news?
In the camp’s central yard, they gripped their shields,
Leaned on their long spears. Now Euryalus
And Nisus pleaded for an urgent hearing:
This would be worth it. Iulus took the lead,
Welcomed the fervent youths, had Nisus speak.
Hyrtacus’ son began: “Friends of Aeneas,
Give us a thoughtful hearing; don’t regard
218–­Acestes: A Trojan leader who
had already settled in Sicily.

205

210

215

220

225

230

235

232–­Iulus took the lead: Although
Iulus must be only twelve years old, he
shows precocious leadership skills.

. 236 .

BOOK 9
Our age. Our enemies are sunk in silence
And wine and sleep. We’ve seen a gap to sneak through
Near the sea, where the road forks at the gate.
There the black smoke from scattered campfires rises
Clear to the stars. Just let us use this chance
To reach Aeneas at Pallanteum’s fort:
You’ll see us here again soon, with the spoils
Of a great slaughter. No, we won’t get lost:
From hidden valleys where we hunt, we’ve seen
The outskirts. The whole river is familiar.”
Aletes spoke, age-­burdened, ripe in judgment:
“Our fathers’ gods, forever ruling Troy,
You can’t mean to destroy us utterly:
You’ve given our young men such valiant spirits.”
Speaking, he turned to each and clasped their hands
And shoulders. Tears were gushing down his face.
“What prizes, warriors, could I think worthy
Of your heroics? Here’s the first and finest:
The gods’ approval; prompt rewards will come, too,
From good Aeneas and Ascanius.
The youngster won’t forget such vital service.”
The prince concurred. “Father’s return alone
Can save me. By our city’s great gods, Nisus,
Assaracus’ god, white-­haired Vesta’s shrine:
I’m trusting all my fortune, all my hopes
To you. Bring back my father, let me see him.
What can we fear when he’s with us? I’ll give you
Two well-­made silver cups, deeply embossed
(My father’s spoil from capturing Arisba),
Two tripods, two gold bars of standard weight,

246–­Aletes: A Trojan companion of
Aeneas, last seen at 1.122.
259–­Assaracus: The grandfather of
Anchises.

240

245

250

255

260

265

259–­Vesta: Goddess of the hearth.
264–­
My father’s spoil from cap­
turing Arisba: Nothing more is known
about the episode.

. 237 .

BOOK 9
An ancient wine bowl from Sidonian Dido.
And when Aeneas conquers Italy,
Claims kingship, and distributes all the spoils—
You saw the horse gold-­armored Turnus rode?
Nisus, I’ll set that beast aside for you;
The shield and red crest too are yours already.
Father will add his gifts: twelve hand-­picked slave girls,
All mothers, and twelve captives with their armor,
And King Latinus’ own estates besides.
You, honored boy, who’re closer to my own age,
With all my soul I’ll keep you as a friend
In everything I have to face, pursuing
No glory on my own account without you.
In peace and war, you’ll be my foremost comrade
And confidant.” Euryalus responded:
“No time will come that shows me less courageous
Than in this enterprise. If only luck
Won’t turn against me—but I ask one favor
Besides these. My poor mother, of the old race
Of Priam, wouldn’t stay behind in Troy
Or King Acestes’ fort, but came with me.
I’ve kept from her my plans, however risky,
And my good-­byes (your right hand and the night
Witness this), since I couldn’t bear her tears.
But you, assuage her loss, relieve her need.
If I believe you will, I’ll take my chances
More boldly.” These words struck the Trojans’ hearts.
They wept—and handsome Iulus most of all,
Wrung by the thought of how he loved his father.
He spoke:
“Be sure of everything this great task earns you:
She’ll be my mother, lacking just the name
Creusa—and get no small thanks for having
A son like you. However this turns out,
I swear it by this life my father swore on.

. 238 .

270

275

280

285

290

295

300

BOOK 9
My pledges, if you don’t return successful,
Are for your mother and your family.”
Weeping, he took the gold sword from his shoulders:
The wondrous skill of Knossian Lycaon
Had shaped the blade to fit an ivory scabbard.
Mnestheus’ hunting spoil, a lion’s rough pelt
Was Nisus’. Staunch Aletes traded helmets
With him. The armed youths set out; all the leaders,
Both old and young, stood praying at the gates:
Among them handsome Iulus, with the forethought
And duty of a man before his time,
Sent many messages, but might as well
Have given them to misty wind to scatter.
In shadowed night, they crossed the moats and sought
The hostile camp: many would die before them.
Randomly on the grass men sprawled in wine’s sleep,
And chariots stood upright on the shore.
Among the reins and weapons, wheels and wine jars
Soldiers were lying. Nisus broke the silence:
“This is our chance to strike, Euryalus.
Come on this way, and look around and guard me;
Make certain no one follows where we go.
I’ll lead you on a broad path—which I’ll empty.”
He checked his voice and made his way to Rhamnes
The proud, who happened to be snoring loudly
In slumber, propped up on a pile of blankets:
A prophet, Turnus’ friend, a king himself;
But prophecy would not prevent his death.
Three slaves were slumped among the weapons; Nisus
Stifled them; also Remus’ page and driver
Under the team, whose drooping necks he cut,
304–­Knossian Lycaon: Otherwise
unknown, but Cretans were renowned
for their craftsmanship.

. 239 .

305

310

315

320

325

330

BOOK 9
Then lopped their owner’s head and left the body
Sobbing out blood: warm, black, it soaked the bed
And ground. He then killed Lamyrus and Lamus
And handsome young Serranus, who’d stayed up
To gamble, and lay beaten by the wine god—
Too much for him. It would have been more lucky
For him to go on gambling until dawn.
Nisus was like a famished lion raging
In crowded sheep pens, gnashing, dragging soft beasts
In their mute terror, roaring with his red mouth.
Euryalus blazed just as fiercely, killing.
Rank-­and-­file soldiers never saw him coming—
Fadus, Herbesus, Abaris, and Rhoetus—
No, Rhoetus was awake through all of it,
And shrank in fear behind a giant wine jar.
He rose to fight; from close at hand a sword
Thrust to the hilt and came out, dripping death.
He spewed his soul in wine-­stained purple blood.
His killer carried on, in eager stealth.
Now he was making toward Messapus’ camp—
Its dying outer fires, its horses tethered,
Cropping the grass. But Nisus, when he sensed
The boy’s blood-­greed grow out of bound, spoke curtly:
“We need to stop. Light’s coming and could catch us.
We’ve hit them hard and made our way beyond them.”
They left behind there many splendid weapons
Of silver, mixing bowls, and lovely fabrics.
Euryalus took Rhamnes’ gold-­bossed sword belt
And badges. Wealthy Caedicus had sent them
To Remulus of Tibur, to befriend him
From far off. This man left them to his grandson,
After whose time Rutulians plundered them.

351–­Messapus: See 8.6n.

361–­Tibur: Tivoli.

. 240 .

335

340

345

350

355

360

BOOK 9
And now they hung from powerful, doomed shoulders;
Messapus’ helmet with its showy plumes,
Fitted well too. They left the camp for safe ground.
Volcens, just then, came from the Latin city
With a response for Turnus, and three hundred
Cavalry with their shields—aside from them,
Their army was deployed across the plain.
Nearing the walls, they saw, off in the distance,
The young men take the path that headed left.
In the dim-­glimmering light the shining helmet,
Forgotten by Euryalus, betrayed him.
Alertly, Volcens called, “Halt, men! Who are you?
Where do you think you’re going, and for what?
Why are you armed?” They didn’t try to answer
But rushed for refuge to the night-­black woods.
The horsemen knew the byroads; splitting up,
They blocked all exits with a ring of guards.
The place was large, and full of dusky holm oaks
And rough brush; briars choked it everywhere.
Only some sparse trails showed, vague cattle tracks.
Euryalus, weighed down by plunder, stumbled
Through branching shadows. Fear befuddled him.
But Nisus didn’t notice; he escaped
And passed the place now called—from Alba—Alban.
(The lofty pens for King Latinus’ herds
Were there.) He stopped, looked back; his friend was gone.
“Where did I leave you, poor Euryalus?
Where should I look?” Back through the knotted path,
The maze of woods, he went, tracing his footprints
Where he could see, and wandered in still thickets.
Horses’ tread, clanging, signals—the pursuers!
387–­
the place now called—from
Alba—Alban: See 8.48n.
389–­He stopped, looked back; his

365

370

375

380

385

390

friend was gone: An echo of book 2,
when Aeneas realizes he has lost Creusa
during the sack of Troy (2.738–94).

. 241 .

BOOK 9
Before much longer, shouting reached his ears.
He saw the whole force rush Euryalus
And overwhelm him, though he struggled hard.
That dark deceitful spot had left him helpless.
But what should Nisus do? How should he strike
To free the boy? Perhaps he ought to plunge
Into their swords—a quick and noble death.
He’d hurl his spear. He swiftly drew it back
And gazed up at the moon above and prayed:
“Be with me now, Diana, help my struggle,
Keeper of forests, glory of the stars.
If for my sake my father brought your altar
His gifts, and if I hung your temple roof
With beasts killed in my hunts, to honor you,
Then guide my spear and let me rout this band.”
All of his body strained to throw the weapon
Of iron, which flew off, sliced through the shadows
Of night, went into Sulmo’s back and shattered,
Thrusting its splinters through his diaphragm.
He writhed, warm blood was spewing from his chest,
Long gasps convulsed his sides as chill death took him.
They looked to all sides. Nisus, now grown fiercer,
Poised a fresh weapon high up, by his ear.
As they stood shocked, the spear sang through the temples
Of Tagus and stuck fast in his warm brain.
Volcens, beside himself, still couldn’t see
The spear’s source and attack it in his fury.
He told Euryalus, “Then you can pay
For both with your hot blood.” He drew his sword
And strode up. Nisus shouted, wild with terror.
He couldn’t hide in darkness any longer,
He couldn’t stand such agony. “It’s me!
I’m here! I did it. Turn your swords on me!
It’s all my fault. He didn’t dare, he couldn’t.
The sky and the all-­knowing stars can witness:

. 242 .

395

400

405

410

415

420

425

BOOK 9
He only loved his luckless friend too much.”
He spoke, but couldn’t stop the spear that rammed
Into Euryalus’ ribs and split his white chest.
Dying, he thrashed. His lovely limbs and shoulders
Poured streams of blood; his neck sank limply down:
So, cut off by a plow, a purple flower
Faints away into death; so poppies bend
Their weary necks when rain weighs down their heads.
Nisus ran in among them, but he aimed
For Volcens only—that was all he wanted.
Enemies mobbed in close on either side
To drive him back. He fought on, lightning sword
Whirling. With this he pierced the shouting face
Of the Rutulian, paying with his own life.
He was stabbed through and through and hurled himself
On his dead friend, to find his rest and peace.
Lucky pair! If my song has any power,
You’ll be remembered while Aeneas’ children
Live near the Capitol’s unmoving rock,
And while a Roman father has dominion.
The plunder fell to the Rutulian cohort,
Who also, tearfully, took Volcens’ body.
As great a grief awaited them, with Rhamnes
Found lifeless, with the massacre of leaders—
Numa, Serranus. To the corpses crowds rushed,
To dying men, to ground the fresh gore warmed,
To rivulets that swelled with foaming blood.
A murmur rose: they saw Messapus’ badges
And helmet—so much work to win them back!
Dawn rose now from Tithonus’ saffron bed
And scattered her fresh light throughout the world.
Now in the sun-­soaked and revealing day,
First Turnus armed himself, then called his men
459–­Tithonus: Dawn’s husband.

. 243 .

430

435

440

445

450

455

460

BOOK 9
To arms. Each leader urged his bronze ranks on,
Inflaming them with news of what had happened.
And—piteous sight—they even raised the heads
Of Nisus and Euryalus on spear ends,
And marched with shouts behind.
Aeneas’ hard men faced them in a line
At the left wall (the river hugged the right one),
Guarded their moats, or grimly manned their towers.
A shock of grief—they recognized the heads
Too well. Black gore was oozing down the spears.
Rumor came swooping through the frightened town
And whispered to Euryalus’ mother. All warmth,
Down to her bones, went out of that poor lady.
She dropped her shuttle, and the thread unwound.
She dashed outdoors with piteous female keening,
Tore at her hair, ran for the walls and front lines,
Unmindful of the men there and the danger
Their spears held. Soon her wailing filled the sky:
“Euryalus, that’s you, my only solace
As my life closed? But how could you desert me
So cruelly, without letting your poor mother
Tell you good-­bye before that risky mission?
Alien Latium’s dogs and birds will tear you.
Your mother couldn’t walk you to the grave,
Close your eyes, wrap you in the robe I rushed,
Night and day, at my loom to finish—worry
In an old woman can be soothed this way.
Where will I look for you? What region holds
Your torn corpse? All of you that you bring back
Is this? I came with you on land and sea!
Rutulians, if you care, launch all your spears
At me, hack me to death, then fight your war.
Or you, great father of the gods, have pity,
Strike me with lightning, hurl the life I hate
To Hades: only that can end my pain.”

. 244 .

465

470

475

480

485

490

495

BOOK 9
A moan ran through the ranks. They all were heart-­struck,
Their strength numb, fighting spirit broken, grief
Enflamed—so Actor and Idaeus took her
In hand and led her back indoors, at orders
From sobbing Iulus and Ilioneus.
The bronze horn blared its fearful melody
Far off. Men shouted, and the sky roared back.
Volscians, under overlapping shields,
Rushed in to fill the moats and drag the fence down.
One group was set to climb the walls with ladders
And aimed to get in where the ring of guards
Was gapped or thin. The Trojans poured down weapons
Of all kinds and shoved back with sturdy pikes.
Their past long war had taught them siege defense.
They spun down massive boulders from the walls
To break the sheltered column, but the men
Beneath their sturdy roof enjoyed each blow—
Until the Trojans rolled a monstrous rock
To where the largest cohort threatened them;
This wrecked a stretch of the Rutulians’ cover
And struck its bearers down; the rest, though hearty,
Had no more taste for fighting blind, but struggled
To pelt the Trojans off their wall.
Elsewhere Mezentius brandished—chilling sight—
A fiery, smoking pine tree as a weapon.
Now the horse-­breaker, Neptune’s son Messapus,
Breached the fence, called for ladders for the walls.
So come, Calliope and all your sisters,
Inspire me, let me sing of Turnus’ slaughter,
The men that every soldier sent to Orcus.
505–­Volscians: A native Italian
people.
505–­under overlapping shields: The
“tortoise” formation, which featured
interlocked shields above and in front.

500

505

510

515

520

525

525–­
Calliope and all your sisters:
Calliope is the Muse of epic poetry; her
sisters are the eight other Muses.
527–­Orcus: The Underworld.

. 245 .

BOOK 9
Goddesses, help unfold that great war’s contours:
You know it; you know how to make it known.
There was a looming tower with high gangplanks
In a strategic spot. With all their strength,
All their resources, the Italians tried
To storm or topple it. Massed at the windows,
Trojans hurled stones and spears in their defense.
Now Turnus took the lead and threw a torch:
Its flames clung to the wall, spread in the wind,
Seized planks, stuck to the doors, devouring them.
Inside was futile panic to escape.
When the defenders backed away to huddle
In a safe place, their weight collapsed the tower,
And the sky echoed with the sudden crash.
Dying, they fell, impaled on their own spears
And the hard splinters—then the huge mass followed.
Only two crawled out, Lycus and Helenor.
This last, a youth sired by a Lydian king
On the slave Licymnia, was born in secret
And sent by her to Troy, though banned from war.
His arms were light: an unheroic shield
With no device, a bare sword. Latin columns
Flanked him now. He saw Turnus’ men in thousands,
And as a wild thing ringed in tight by hunters
Lashes against their spears and leaps on purpose
To perish on their weapons, so the young man
Rushed in to die among his enemies,
Making for where he saw the spears were densest.
Lycus, a better runner, dodged opponents
And missiles till he reached the wall. He struggled
To grip the top edge and the hands of friends.
529–­The line is thought to be spurious.

. 246 .

530

535

540

545

550

555

BOOK 9
Turnus ran after him and launched a spear
With a triumphant taunt: “Fool, did you think
You’d get away from me?” He tore him down
From where he hung—a stretch of wall came with him;
So a bird, keeper of Jove’s lightning, soars
Skyward, hooked claws around a hare or swan;
So a wolf drags a plundered lamb its mother
Searches for, bleating. Shouting rose on all sides.
Soldiers ran in to fill the moat with dirt
And hurl their torches to the roof. Lucetius
Had brought his to the gate; Ilioneus
Laid him out with a cliff shard. The skilled lancer
Liger struck down Emathion; Asilas,
Whose arrow stole from far off, Corynaeus.
Turnus killed Dioxippus, Clonius, Itys,
Promolus, Caeneus (who’d killed Ortygius),
Sagaris, and, on towered bastions, Idas.
Capys dispatched Privernus, who had dropped
His shield, the idiot, to clutch a slight wound
Dealt by Themillas’ spear. An arrow flew
To lodge deep in his left side, splitting open
His hidden breathways with a fatal wound.
The son of Arcens was a splendid sight
With his superb arms and embroidered cloak
Bright with red Spanish dye. His father’d sent him
From Mars’ grove by the banks of the Symaethus,
Close to Palicus’ altar, rich with gifts.
Mezentius put his spears aside and whipped
His hissing sling three times around his head.
The searing lead chunk hit the brow straight on,
Split it, and stretched the tall form on the ground.
563–­a bird, keeper of Jove’s light­
ning: The eagle, Jove’s bird.

560

565

570

575

580

585

584–85–­Symaethus . . . Palicus: Palicus was a god worshipped in Sicily near
the river Symaethus.

. 247 .

BOOK 9
They say Ascanius first aimed an arrow
In war that day—before, he’d only hunted—
And with his own skill brought Numanus down.
Remulus was his clan name. He was freshly
Allied: he’d married Turnus’ younger sister.
Pride-­swollen as a sharer in the kingdom,
He came up past the vanguard now to flaunt
His bulk and shout the hit and miss of insults:
“Twice-­beaten Phrygians, don’t you feel embarrassed
At how we keep you penned behind your fence?
You fight with us, to take away our wives?
What god, what madness drove you to this country?
No sons of Atreus here, no glib Ulysses.
Our stock is tough; we make our infants tougher,
Dipping them in a savagely cold river.
Our boys stay up and wear the woods out, hunting.
Their games are archery and taming horses.
Our young men, used to scarcity and hard work,
Subdue the soil and batter towns with war.
We live our lives with weapons, drive our oxen
With butts of spears. Not even slow old age
Cripples our courage or our heartiness.
Helmets press down white hair, since we prefer
To live on what we plunder, as a habit.
Needlework glows on you, saffron and purple.
You love to laze and treat yourself to dancing.
Your hats have ribbons and your tunics sleeves.
You’re Phrygian women! Climb up Dindymus:
The double flute there plays the songs you’re used to.

592–93–­Numanus . . . Remulus: His
name recalls Romulus, Remus, and the
early Roman king Numa Pompilius.
617–­Phrygian women: Recalls Ther‑

590

595

600

605

610

615

sites taunting the Greeks as “Achaean
women” in Iliad 2.
617–­Dindymus: A mountain in
Phrygia.

. 248 .

BOOK 9
The Mother on Mount Ida calls with drums
And boxwood flutes. Leave weapons for us men.”
Ascanius could not endure these boasts
And ugly taunts. He turned and pulled the bow wide,
Aiming an arrow on the horse-­gut bowstring,
And paused, a suppliant addressing Jove:
“Almighty Jupiter, bless my bold effort.
I’ll bring your temple ritual gifts myself
And set before your altar a white bullock
With gilded horns, the same height as his mother.
He’ll butt and kick up sand already.” Hearing,
The sire of heaven thundered from a clear sky
On the left, as the deadly bow was twanging.
With a grim hiss, the drawn-­back arrow fled.
Its iron point transfixed the curving temples
Of Remulus. “Go bait brave soldiers now!
This is your answer from twice-­beaten Phrygians.”
Jubilant Trojans followed up these words
With roaring yells. Their hearts soared to the skies.
Long-­haired Apollo, cloud-­throned in the sky,
Watched the Italian army and the town,
And now he spoke to Iulus in his triumph:
“Bless your first brave act: that’s the way to heaven.
Godborn, you’ll father gods. Troy cannot hold you.
All destined wars will one day cease, in justice,
Under Assaracus’ posterity.”
He soared through gusty air down from the aether
To the boy, and assumed old Butes’ features.
This was the faithful house guard and retainer
Who’d served Dardanian Anchises first,
Whose son made him Ascanius’ protector.
619–­The Mother on Mount Ida: Cybele.

. 249 .

620

625

630

635

640

645

BOOK 9
Like this old man in voice and coloring
And armor with its dreadful clang, Apollo
Strode up and spoke to Iulus in his fervor:
“Enough, Aeneas’s son! Your arrow killed
Numanus; you survived this first success,
Which great Apollo gave, with his own weapon.
But you must stop now.” Halfway through these words,
Apollo put aside the mortal form,
And faded into far-­off, filmy air.
The Trojan leaders heard his quiver clatter—
He vanished, and they recognized the armed god,
And held war-­hot Ascanius in check
At Phoebus’ holy orders. They themselves
Returned to their exposed and risky fight.
A shout went all along the walls and ramparts.
They fiercely aimed their bows and whirled their spear-­thongs
And strewed the ground with weapons. Hollow helmets
And shields were clanging in the bitter fight,
Thick as ground-­lashing rain out of the west
At the Kids’ stormy rise; or hail that storm clouds
Plunge in the sea—the soaking gale that Jove hurls,
Bristling with southern blasts, to split the gray vault.
Alcanor’s sons by Ida’s nymph Iaera,
Fighters called Pandarus and Bitias,
Raised in Jove’s woods, huge as their native firs
And mountains, opened up the gates assigned them
And called opponents in. Trusting their weapons,
They flanked the entranceway, as strong as towers,
Iron-­clad, and with lofty, ruffing plumes;
As when two oak trees rear their bushy heads
To heaven with exalted, nodding crests
Beside the flowing water, on the banks
669–­the Kids’ stormy rise: The Goat
Stars, now called Auriga, the Charioteer.

. 250 .

650

655

660

665

670

675

680

BOOK 9
Of the Po, or the lovely Athesis.
Rutulians saw the opening and swarmed it.
But soon Aquiculus—fine sight in armor—
Reckless Tmarus, Quercens, Haemon (Mars’ son)
Had either turned and run with all their troops
Or laid their lives down on that very threshold.
The clashing hatred and the fury grew.
The Trojans, massed at one point, dared to fight
Hand to hand, and to sally out ahead.
Elsewhere the chieftain Turnus, on a rampage
Through fighters, got the news of this fresh slaughter:
The enemy was flaunting open gates!
A boundless fury made him storm away
To the Dardanian gate and the proud brothers.
Antiphates led the attack, a bastard
Of Prince Sarpedon by a Theban mother.
Turnus hurled an Italian cornel spear
That sliced the soft air, pierced the gut, and burrowed
Up the chest. Froth pulsed out of that black hollow.
The iron point grew warm, lodged in the lung.
He struck down Merops, Erymas, Aphidnus,
And flame-­eyed Bitias (who’d roared with pride)—
Not with a spear (he wouldn’t have surrendered
His life to one) but with a shrieking pike
Propelled like lightning through his shield’s two ox hides
And double gold scales of his trusted breastplate.
His massive body crumpled and collapsed.
The earth groaned, and his great shield clanged above him,
Just as, on the Euboean coast at Baiae,
A pier built in the sea on massive rock piles
Collapses, with a steep, fast drag of wreckage,
Bursts on the shallow seafloor before settling;
710–­the Euboean coast at Baiae: On
the Bay of Naples, near Cumae.

. 251 .

685

690

695

700

705

710

BOOK 9
The water is in chaos; black sand rises.
Islands boom: high Prochyta, Inarime—
Typhoeus’ prison bed, placed by Jove’s orders.
Now Mars, war master, gave the Latins strength
And spirit, twisting sharp goads in their hearts,
While letting loose black Fear and Rout on Trojans.
The Latin troops swarmed in—the fight was here;
The warrior god inspired them.
Pandarus saw his brother’s sprawled-­out body,
And knew the course that destiny was taking.
With all his strength, heaving with his broad shoulders,
He turned the gate in on its hinge and left
Many friends shut out in the brutal battle.
Others rushed through in time. The idiot
Missed the Rutulian prince, who got inside
Deep in the crowd—invited to the city:
A giant tiger penned with helpless cattle.
From Turnus’ eyes a fresh light flashed, his weapons
Rang fearsomely, his blood-­red crest convulsed,
His shield flared lightning—and Aeneas’ people
Instantly knew the giant hated form
And panicked. But then towering Pandarus
Ran forward, burning to avenge his brother.
“Amata’s wedding gift this isn’t—it’s no palace;
And it’s not Ardea, your native stronghold.
This is a hostile fort. You can’t get out.”
Serenely Turnus smiled at him and answered:
“Come, if you dare, fight hand to hand, then go

715–16–­Prochyta, Inarime—Typhoeus’
prison bed: Islands near Baiae. Typhoeus
was a Giant imprisoned under the earth
by Jupiter.

715

720

725

730

735

740

719–­Fear and Rout: Deities personifying the phenomena.
738–­Ardea: Turnus’ city.

. 252 .

BOOK 9
Tell Priam that you’ve met Achilles here.”
Pandarus put his whole strength into hurling
His crude spear with its knots and green bark. Breezes
Wafted it off, or Saturn’s daughter Juno
Turned it aside. It hit the gate and stuck.
Turnus spoke: “Here’s a weapon and a strong hand
You won’t escape: it’s me who drives this home.”
He reared up with his sword and thrust it midway
Between the young man’s temples, monstrously
Splitting his forehead and his beardless cheeks.
A crash—the ground was shaken by his huge weight:
He crumpled and sprawled dying there, his armor
Covered with gory brains, and one precise half
Of the head hanging down at either shoulder.
The routed Trojans scattered in their terror.
Had their pursuer been inspired to break
The bolts and let his comrades in, that war
And that race would have found their end that day.
Hot frenzy, though, crazed bloodlust drove him forward
Onto the battle line.
First, he caught Phaleris and Gyges (hamstrung)—
Seized both their spears and thrust them in the backs
Of men he chased, with strength and nerve from Juno:
Halys and shield-­pierced Phegeus joined the dead;
Halius, Prytanis, Noëmon, Alcander—
Incautious on the walls, rallying others.
Lynceus called his friends and made for Turnus,
Who lunged left from the earthworks, flashed a sword
And stopped him. In his helmet lay his head,
Far off: one blow, close up, had severed it.
742–­
Tell Priam that you’ve met
Achilles here: A fulfillment of the Sibyl’s
prophecy, 6.89–90.

. 253 .

745

750

755

760

765

770

BOOK 9
Amycus fell next, wild-­beast killer—no one
Was handier at smearing spears with poison;
And Clytius, Aeolus’ son; Cretheus
As well, the Muses’ follower, whose joy
Was setting music to the lyre and singing
Of horses, weapons, warriors, and battles.
News of this carnage brought the Trojan leaders—
Mnestheus, fierce Serestus—there at last.
They saw the enemy inside, friends scattered.
“Where are you running?” yelled Mnestheus.
“What walls, what fortress have you got but these?
Citizens! Will you let a single man
Trapped in your earthworks pile your town with slaughter
And send your finest soldiers down to Hades?
Have pity on your ancient gods, your poor race,
And great Aeneas! Cowards, where’s your shame?”
This roused them. Now they rallied against Turnus
In a dense column. Gradually, he moved
Back to a spot encircled by a stream.
The Trojans pressed more fiercely on, converging
With loud shouts, as a band of hunters holds
A savage lion at their spear points; frightened,
Glaring, and storming, he retreats, but fury
And courage will not let him run. He longs
To strike back at the men and spears but can’t.
So Turnus slowly and reluctantly
Stepped backward, as his spirit seethed with rage.
He even dashed clear through opposing ranks
Twice, and twice scattered them along the walls.
The camp soon reunited all its forces.
And Juno, Saturn’s daughter, didn’t dare
Grant strength to fight them: Jove sent down limpid Iris
Conveying threats and orders for his sister
804–­his sister: Juno.

. 254 .

775

780

785

790

795

800

BOOK 9
If Turnus didn’t leave the Trojans’ walls.
His shield and sword were not enough—the young man
Could not hold out. The missiles from all sides
Engulfed him. Constantly his helmet rang
Around his head. Stones split the solid bronze,
Tore off the plume. His shield could not endure
The blows. The Trojans—thundering Mnestheus
Among them—heaped their spears on. Turnus’ body
Was pouring filthy sweat—he had no time now
To catch his breath. He shook, worn, sore, and panting.
At last he jumped headfirst, with all his weapons,
Into the river, and its tawny surge
Welcomed him, raised him on soft waves, returned him,
Content and cleansed of blood, to his companions.

. 255 .

805

810

815
