Arms and a man I sing, the first from Troy,
A fated exile to Lavinian shores
In Italy. On land and sea divine force
Shook him, through ruthless Juno’s brooding rage.
War racked him too, until he set his city
And gods in Latium. There his Latin race rose,
With Alban patriarchs, and high Rome’s walls.
Muse, tell me why. What stung the queen of heaven,
What insult to her power made her drive
This righteous hero through so much undoing
And suffering? Can gods’ hearts know such fury?
Carthage, an ancient Tyrian outpost, faces
Italy and the far-­off Tiber’s mouth,
Rich, and experienced and fierce in war.
This land, they say, was Juno’s darling. (Samos

1–­man: The Trojan hero Aeneas, son
of Anchises and the goddess Venus, the
protagonist of the poem. The Latin vir,
“man,” can also mean “hero.”
2–­Lavinian: Here, Italian. Lavinium
will be the first city Aeneas founds in
Italy, named after his future wife, Lavinia.
7–­Alban patriarchs: The noble
houses of Alba Longa, the city founded
by Aeneas’ son Ascanius; these included
the Julii; see 1.270–71.
10–­righteous: Latin pius, “devoted
to country, gods, and family.” This is
Aeneas’ chief character trait.

5

10

15

12– ­Carthage: a Phoenician colony
in northwest Africa that became Rome’s
greatest rival in the Mediterranean. The
three Punic Wars between Rome and
Carthage (264–146 BCE) ended with the
complete destruction of Carthage.
12–­Tyrian: Tyre is the Phoenician city
from which Dido fled to found Carthage.
13–­Tiber: The river on which Rome
was founded.
15–­Samos: An Aegean island with an
important temple of Juno.

.3.

BOOK 1
Came second.) There her chariot and arms
Were kept, and from the start she planned that Carthage
Would rule the world—if only fate allowed!
But she had heard that one day Troy’s descendants
Would pull her Tyrian towers to the ground.
A war-­proud race with broad domains would come
To cut down Africa: the fates ordained it.
Saturn’s child feared this. She recalled the war
She’d fought at Troy for her beloved Greeks
And also what had caused her savage anger.
Deep in her heart remained the verdict given
By Paris, and the insult to her beauty—
Ganymede raped and honored—that whole race
Of Trojans. Hot with rage, she barred from Latium
Those spared by cruel Achilles and the Greeks.
They tossed on endless seas, went wandering,
Fate-­driven, year on year around the world’s seas.
A weighty work, to found the Roman nation!
Sicily fell from sight. They sailed with joy
Into the open, bronze prows churning foam.
But Juno, with her deep, unhealing heart wound,
Muttered, “Am I defeated, done with trying
To keep the Trojan king from Italy?

23–­Saturn’s child: Juno, daughter of
the Titan Saturn.
26–27–­the verdict given by Paris: a
reference to the Judgment of Paris, the
Trojan prince who was asked to judge
which goddess, Venus, Minerva, or Juno,
was the most beautiful. He chose Venus,
who promised him the most beautiful woman in the world, Helen, for his
bride.

20

25

30

35

28–­Ganymede raped and honored:
The Trojan prince Ganymede was raped
by Jupiter, then given the honor of being
cupbearer to the gods. Juno is enraged by
her husband’s infidelities.
30–­cruel Achilles and the Greeks:
Aeneas and his small band of Trojans
are refugees from Troy, destroyed by
the Greeks following a ten-­year siege.
Achilles was one of the mightiest Greek
heroes, slayer of the Trojan prince Hector.

.4.

BOOK 1
Fate blocks me. But then why could Pallas burn
The Trojan fleet and drown the men it carried,
Merely to punish Ajax’ frenzied crime?
Out of the clouds she hurled Jove’s hungry fire,
Scattered the ships and overturned the sea.
Her flames impaled the man, her whirlwind snatched him,
And on a piercing rock he gasped his life out.
But I, parading as the queen of heaven,
Jove’s wife and sister, fight a single people
For years. Will anyone now bow and pray
To me and place his tribute on my altar?”
Blazing within, the goddess sought the land
Of thunderclouds, which teems with southern gales.
There struggling winds and howling tempests fill
The whole vast cave that King Aeolus rules.
He disciplines them, chains them in their prison.
They shriek with rage around the bolted doors;
The mountain echoes. Throned up on a summit,
Aeolus holds a scepter, checks their anger—
Without him, they would seize land, sea, and deep sky
To carry with them in their breakneck flight.
But the almighty father, fearing this,
Shut them in that black cave, heaped mountains on it,
And set a ruler over them to slacken
The reins or tighten them, strict in control.

39–­Pallas: The goddess Minerva (in
Greek, Pallas Athena).
41–­Ajax’ frenzied crime: During the
sack of Troy the Greek warrior Ajax the
Lesser raped Cassandra, a Trojan priestess, though she had taken refuge at
Minerva’s altar.
42–­Jove’s hungry fire: Jove’s (Jupi­
ter’s) daughter, Minerva, here borrows
her father’s weapon, lightning.

40

45

50

55

60

53–­The whole vast cave: According
to myth the winds were imprisoned in a
cave on the island of Aeolia. Vergil later
(8.417) identifies Aeolia with Lipari, a
volcanic island off the northern coast of
Sicily.
60–­the almighty father: Jupiter.

.5.

BOOK 1
Juno approached him now and made this plea:
“The king of men and father of the gods
Gives you the right to rouse and soothe the waves.
A race I hate sails the Tyrrhenian Sea,
Bringing Troy’s beaten gods to Italy.
Goad your winds into fury, swamp the ships,
Or scatter them, strew bodies on the water.
Fourteen voluptuous nymphs belong to me,
And the most beautiful is Deiopea.
Her I will make your own, in steadfast union,
If you will help me. She will spend her life
With you—the lovely children that you’ll sire!”
Aeolus said, “You merely must decide,
My sovereign. I must hurry to obey.
My reign—my modest kingdom—and Jove’s favor
You brought me. I recline with gods at banquets,
I rule the stormy clouds because of you.”
With his upended spear he struck a flank
Of the hollow mountain. In a battle charge
The winds pour out. They spiral through the world:
The East and South gales, and the mass of whirlwinds
From Africa swoop down, uproot the sea,
And send enormous billows rolling shoreward.
The men begin to shout, the ropes to squeal.
Sudden clouds snatch away the daylight sky
From Trojan sight. Black night roosts on the deep.
67–­Tyrrhenian Sea: A tract of the
Mediterranean Sea situated between Sardinia and Corsica and the Italian peninsula, named after the Etruscan prince
Tyrrhenus.
68–­gods: the household gods. See
1.379n.

65

70

75

80

85

83–­
The winds pour out: Descriptions of storms were a standard element
in epic poetry, from the Odyssey on, and
offered poets a chance to compete with
their predecessors.
84–­The East and South gales: The
wind gods Eurus (the East Wind) and
Notus (the South Wind).

.6.

BOOK 1
Heaven resounds, fires dancing in its heights.
The world becomes a threat of instant death.
A swift and icy terror numbed Aeneas.
He moaned and held his hands up to the stars
And gave a cry: “Three times and four times blessed
Are those who perished in their fathers’ sight
Beneath Troy’s walls. You, Diomedes, boldest
Of Greeks, could you not spill my blood and let me
Fall on the fields of Troy, like raging Hector,
Slain by Achilles’ spear, or tall Sarpedon,
Where Simoïs River churns beneath his ripples
Shields, helmets, bodies of so many brave men?”
A screaming northern gale blew past his wild words
And slammed the sails and pulled a wave toward heaven.
The oars broke, the prow swerved and set the ship
Against a looming precipice of water.
Crews dangled on the crest or glimpsed the seabed
Between the waves. Sand poured through seething water.
The South Wind hurled them three times at the rocks
That lurked midway—Italians call them altars;
Their massive spine protrudes—three times the East Wind
Dashed them clear to the shallows—awful sight—
And rammed them tight, and ringed them with a sand wall.
Before Aeneas’ eyes a towering wave tipped,

90–­
fires dancing in its heights:
Probably Saint Elmo’s Fire, a weather
phenomenon in which a bright blue or
violet glow appears around masts in inclement weather.
96–­Diomedes: One of the greatest
of the Greek warriors; he nearly killed
Aeneas at Troy, but Venus pulled her son
from the fight (see Iliad 5).

90

95

100

105

110

98–­Hector: The greatest Trojan warrior, whose slaughter by Achilles is depicted in Homer’s Iliad.
99–­Sarpedon: A Trojan warrior, son
of Jupiter.
109–­altars: The Aegimori, two small
rocky islands off the coast of Carthage.
111–­shallows: The Syrtes, dangerous sandbanks off the northern coast of
Africa.

.7.

BOOK 1
To strike head-­on the ship of staunch Orontes
And the Lycians, and whirled the helmsman out
Headfirst. The boat was whipped in three tight circles,
And then the greedy whirlpool swallowed it.
The endless sea showed scatterings of swimmers.
Planks, gear, and Trojan treasure strewed the waves.
The storm subdued the strong ships carrying
Ilioneus, Abas, brave Achates,
And old Aletes. Deadly torrents pushed
Through the hulls’ weakened joints, and fissures started
To gape. Now Neptune sensed with stern displeasure
The roaring havoc that the storm let loose.
Even the still depths spurted up. He raised
His calm face from the surface and looked down.
He saw Aeneas’ ships thrown everywhere,
Trojans crushed under waves, the plunging sky.
Juno’s own brother knew her guile and rage.
He called the East and South Winds and addressed them:
“Is this the arrogance of noble birth?
Without my holy sanction, have you dared
To churn up land and sea and raise these mountains?
Which I—but first I’ll calm these waves you’ve roused.
Later I’ll punish you with more than words.
Get out now, fast, and tell this to your ruler:
I was allotted kingship of the sea,
And the harsh trident. In his massive stone hall,
Home to you, East Wind, and the rest, we let him
Swagger, but he must keep that dungeon locked.”
114–15–­
Orontes and the Lycians:
Orontes is the leader of the Lycians, Trojan allies from Anatolia, a term that now
denotes the largest part of Turkey.
121–22–­Ilioneus, Abas, brave Acha­
tes, and old Aletes: Trojan companions
of Aeneas.

115

120

125

130

135

140

138–­kingship of the sea: Neptune
and his brothers, Jupiter and Pluto, split
rulership of the cosmos into three domains: the sky (Jupiter), the sea (Neptune), and the Underworld (Pluto).

.8.

BOOK 1
Faster than words, he calmed the swollen sea,
Chased off the mass of clouds, brought back the sun.
Cymothoë and Triton heaved the ships
Off jagged boulders. Neptune with his trident
Helped them. He freed vast sandbanks, smoothed the surface,
His weightless chariot grazing billows’ peaks;
As often, in a crowded gathering,
Crude commoners in rage begin to riot,
Torches and stones fly, frenzy finds its weapons—
If a grave, upright hero of the nation
Appears, compelling silence and attention,
Then he can tame their hearts and guide their passions:
Like this, the broad sea’s brawling sounds grew quiet
Under its lord’s gaze. Now beneath a clear sky
With slackened reins he rode the breezes onward.
Aeneas’ worn-­out cohort turned to struggle
Toward Libya because its coast was nearest.
A bay runs inland; island bluffs like walls
Create a harbor. From the deep, the waves
Break there and flutter out their separate ways.
Mammoth cliffs flank the place, and twin stone spires
Loom to the sky. Beneath them, smooth and safe,
The water’s hushed. A wooded backdrop quivers
Above; black-­shadowed, bristling uplands loom.
At the bay’s head, cliffs hang to form a grotto
With a clear spring and seat of natural rock.
Nymphs live there. At the shore no rope is needed
To hold worn ships, no hooked and biting anchor.
Aeneas landed seven ships, regrouped
144–­Cymothoë and Triton: Cymothoë is a sea nymph, daughter of Nereus
and Doris; Triton is a sea god.
148–­As often: This is the first of Vergil’s many similes in the poem; the po-

145

150

155

160

165

170

litical relevance to Vergil’s own times is
notable here.
151–­a grave, upright hero: This hero,
who sounds like Aeneas, is presented as a
role model for Roman leaders, including
Augustus, thanks to his pietas.

.9.

BOOK 1
From the whole fleet. The Trojans went ashore
In mighty, yearning love for that dry sand.
Dripping with briny water, they lay down.
To start, Achates struck a spark from flint
And caught the flame in leaves and gave it dry food
All around, till it blazed up through the tinder.
Downheartedly they took out the equipment
Of Ceres, and the soaking grain they’d rescued;
They had to sear it dry before they ground it.
Meanwhile Aeneas climbed a crag to view
The great expanse of sea. Where did the wind toss
Antheus, Capys, Caicus’ lofty prow
Hung with his arms—or any Trojan vessel?
There was no ship in sight. But three stags wandered
The shore. Entire herds came after them,
And grazed in one long column through the valley.
Taking a stand, he snatched the bow and arrows
That his devoted friend Achates carried.
He brought the strutting, branching-­antlered leaders
To the ground first, and then his arrows chased
The crowd in havoc through the leafy groves.
Exulting, he continued till he leveled
Seven large bodies for his seven ships,
Then went to share the meat out at the harbor,
Along with casks of wine, a noble gift
From kind Acestes to the crew departing
From Sicily. Aeneas spoke this comfort:
“Friends, we are all at home with suffering—
Some worse than this—but god will end this too.
177–78–­equipment of Ceres: Tools
used to convert grain into meal. Ceres is
both the Roman goddess of agriculture
and the Latin word for “grain.”
182–­Antheus, Capys, Caicus: Companions of Aeneas.

175

180

185

190

195

196–­Acestes: The son of a river god
and a Trojan woman named Egesta or
Segesta, Acestes is a king of Sicily who
hosts Aeneas and his Trojans before they
land at Carthage (5.30).

. 10 .

BOOK 1
You veered toward Scylla’s frenzy, and the deep roar
At the cliffs, you saw the rocks the Cyclops threw.
Revive your hearts, shake off your gloomy fear.
Sometime you may recall today with pleasure.
We fight through perils and catastrophes
To Latium, where divine fate promises
A peaceful homeland, a new Trojan kingdom.
Endure and live until our fortunes change.”
Sick with colossal burdens, he shammed hope
On his face, and buried grief deep in his heart.
Trojans tied back their clothes and made his quarry
A feast: tore back the hide, bared ribs and guts.
While some men pierced the quivering chunks with spits,
Others set cauldrons out or tended flames.
The food restored and filled them—the old wine,
The rich game—as they stretched out on the grass.
After the meal was done and cleared away,
They spoke with longing of their missing friends.
They hoped, they feared: were these men still alive,
Or past the end and deaf to any summons?
Loyal Aeneas, most of all, was groaning
Softly for keen Orontes, Amycus, Lycus,
For Gyas and Cloanthus—brave men, hard deaths.
Now they were finished. Jove looked down from heaven
At the sail-­flying waters, open flatlands,
The shores, the far-­flung nations. At the sky’s peak,
He fixed his gaze on Libyan territory.
200–201–­
Scylla’s frenzy, and the
deep roar at the cliffs: Scylla (a sea monster) and Charybdis (a whirlpool) were
traditionally located in the Strait of Messina between Sicily and Italy.
201–­the rocks the Cyclops threw: A
reference to Homer’s Odyssey 9, in which
the Cyclops Polyphemus throws boul-

200

205

210

215

220

225

ders at the ship of Odysseus (Ulysses) in
an effort to sink them.
210–­
tied back their clothes: An
anachronistic reference to a custom of
Vergil’s own time. Cumbersome Roman
togas needed to be drawn up and girded
close to the body for active work.

. 11 .

BOOK 1
His mind was anxious, busy. And now Venus
Spoke these sad words to him, her shining eyes
Filling with tears. “You, everlasting ruler
Of gods and men; you, fearsome lightning-­hurler,
What great crime did Aeneas and the Trojans
Commit against you? They have died and died,
But in the whole world found no Italy.
You promised that the circling years would draw
Teucer’s new lineage from them, Romans, chieftains,
With power everywhere on land and sea.
Father, what new thought turns you from this purpose?
When Troy calamitously fell, I weighed it
Against the fate to come, to my great comfort.
Yet fortune goes on pummeling these heroes.
When will you, mighty ruler, end their hardships?
Antenor fled, unharmed, from the surrounding
Greeks, to Illyria’s deep coves, clear to the kingdom
Of Liburnia and the Timavus’ source,
Where the sea breaks through nine mouths, and the mountain
Roars, and the echoing waves oppress the fields.
And there he founded Padua, a homeland
For Trojans, with a Trojan name, its gateway
Displaying Trojan arms. He has his rest there.
But we, your children, promised heirs to heaven,
Lost our ships—monstrous!—through Somebody’s anger
And treachery. We’re kept from Italy.
Where is our new realm, won through righteousness?”
235–­
Teucer’s new lineage: Teucer
was the original ancestor of the Trojan
kings. Through his descendant Aeneas,
the Romans traced their line directly to
the Trojan royal house.
242–­Antenor: A nephew of Priam,
king of Troy. After the city fell, he
founded a colony of Trojans at Venetia
(modern Padua).

230

235

240

245

250

243–­Illyria: The area of the west Balkans, east of the Adriatic Sea.
244–­Liburnia: A part of Illyria.
244–­Timavus: A river in Italy.
247–­Padua: A Trojan colony in
northern Italy.
253–­righteousness: Latin pietas, “de‑
votion to country, gods and family”; cf.
1.10n.

. 12 .

BOOK 1
The gods’ and mortals’ father gave his daughter
The smile that clears the sky of storms and kissed her
Lightly, and this was how he answered her:
“Take heart: no one will touch the destiny
Of your people. You will see Lavinium
In its promised walls, and raise your brave Aeneas
To the stars. No new thoughts change my purposes.
But you’re tormented, so I’ll tell the future,
Unwinding to the light fate’s secret scroll.
In Italy your son will crush a fierce race
In a great war. With the Rutulians beaten,
Three winters and three summers he’ll shape walls
And warrior customs, as he reigns in Latium.
His son Ascanius—called “Iulus” too now
(From Ilus, before Ilium’s rule ended)—
Will reign while thirty spacious years unroll
Their whirling months, and he will move the kingdom
To Alba Longa, heaving up strong ramparts.
Three centuries the dynasty of Hector
Will govern, until Ilia, royal priestess,
Conceives by Mars and brings twin boys to light.
And the wolf ’s nursling (glad to wear brown wolfskin)
Romulus will then lead the race and found
The walls of Mars for Romans, named for him.
For them I will not limit time or space.
Their rule will have no end. Even grim Juno,
Who now exhausts sea, land, and sky with terror,
268–­Ilus: The traditional founder of
Ilium (Troy).
272–­
the dynasty of Hector: Descendants of the Trojan royal house, via
Aeneas and his wife, Creusa, Hector’s sister, were said to have ruled Alba Longa
until the eighth century BCE, when

255

260

265

270

275

280

Romulus was credited with founding the
city of Rome.
273–­Ilia: Mother of Romulus and
Remus.
278–­For them I will not limit time
or space: Jupiter’s prophecy of everlasting empire has helped inspire colonialist
expansion through the centuries.

. 13 .

BOOK 1
Will change her mind and join me as I foster
The Romans in their togas, the world’s masters.
I have decreed it. Gliding years will bring
Anchises’ clan as rulers into Phthia,
Mycenae (once renowned), and beaten Argos.
The noble Trojan line will give us Caesar—
A Julian name passed down from mighty Iulus—
With worldwide empire, glory heaven-­high.
At ease you will receive him with his burden
Of eastern spoils. They’ll pray to him in heaven.
Then wars will cease, cruel history will grow gentle.
Vesta, old Faith, and Quirinus, with Remus
His twin, will make the laws. Tight locks of iron
Will close War’s grim gates. Inside, godless Furor,
Slavering blood on heaps of brutal weapons,
Will roar against the chains that pinion him.”
284–­Anchises’ clan: The Romans.
Their Trojan roots are emphasized;
though Troy was sacked, its descendants
will eventually conquer Greece.
284–85–­Phthia, Mycenae . . . Argos:
Greek settlements: Phthia was the home
of Achilles and his Myrmidon warriors;
Agamemnon ruled Mycenae; Diomedes,
Argos. Jupiter predicts the Roman conquest of Greece in the second century
BCE.
286–­Caesar: Not Julius but his heir
Augustus, previously called Octavian.
287–­Julian name: Augustus inherited the name of Caesar from his
adoptive father, Julius Caesar, his great-­
uncle by blood.
290–­eastern spoils: Augustus negotiated the return of lost battle standards
from the eastern realm of Parthia (in
modern Iran), a significant symbolic and
diplomatic achievement. This is prob-

285

290

295

ably also a reference to his decisive victory over Antony and the Egyptian queen
Cleopatra in 31 BCE.
292–­old Faith: Loyalty, here personified as a goddess, whose cult was established by King Numa early in Rome’s
history.
292– ­Quirinus: Another name for
Romulus; see 6.859n.
294–­close War’s grim gates: Located
in the Roman Forum, the gates of the
temple of Janus, the two-­faced god of
boundaries, were open in times of war,
closed in times of peace. They were
closed extremely rarely: in Vergil’s lifetime only in 29 and 25 BCE. See 7.601–15.
294–­Furor: Madness or frenzy, here
personified. The conflict between frenzy
and piety—duty to one’s family and duty
to the gods—is a central motif in the
Aeneid (see the Introduction).

. 14 .

BOOK 1
Concluding, he dispatched the son of Maia
To have the Trojans welcomed down in Carthage
With its new fort—since Dido, unaware
Of fate, might keep them out. The god’s wings rowed him
Through the vast air, to stand on Libya’s shore.
Since it was heaven’s will, the fierce Phoenicians
Peacefully yielded; most of all, their queen
Turned a calm, gentle face to meet the Trojans.
Steadfast Aeneas spent a worried night,
But at the light of nurturing dawn decided
To go and find out where the wind had brought them
And who or what—the land looked wild—lived here,
And bring what he could learn to his companions.
The fleet lay hidden in a tree-­hemmed inlet,
Under a rocky overhang enclosed
By bristling shade. He set off with Achates
And took two quivering pikes with iron blades.
Deep in the wood his mother came to him,
A girl in face and clothes, armed as in Sparta,
Or like Harpalyce in Thrace, outracing
The breakneck Hebrus with her harried horses—
A huntress with a bow slung, quick to hand,
From her shoulders, loose hair streaming in the wind,
Her clothing’s flowing folds tied over bare knees.
She greeted them and asked, “Please, have you met
One of my sisters roaming? Shouting, chasing
A boar whose mouth drips foam? She has a quiver,
And wears a spotted lynx skin and a belt.”
297–­son of Maia: Mercury, messenger of the gods.
302–­Phoenicians: Here, Carthaginians; see 1.12n.
305–­Steadfast: Another way of
translating pius.
315–­
armed as in Sparta: Spartan

300

305

310

315

320

women were trained in martial skills, including running, hunting, and riding.
316–­Harpalyce in Thrace: a mythical Thracian warrior princess who lived
in the forest.
317–­Hebrus: A river in Thrace, regarded by the Romans as wild country.

. 15 .

BOOK 1
Venus had spoken; now her son began:
“Young girl, I haven’t heard or seen your sister.
But I should call you—what? There’s nothing mortal
In such a voice or face. No, you’re a goddess.
Apollo’s sister? Daughter of a nymph clan?
No matter: have compassion, ease our hardship.
Where on earth, on what shores have storm winds thrown us?
Beneath which tract of sky? The wind and huge waves
Drove us to this strange land in which we wander.
I’ll slaughter many victims at your altar.”
She answered, “This I surely don’t deserve.
These quivers are what Tyrian girls all carry;
We all wear purple boots, laced on our calves.
This is the Punic realm, Agenor’s city.
Unconquerable Africans surround us.
Dido is queen; she came here out of Tyre,
Escaping from her brother’s persecution.
It’s quite a story, but I’ll tell it briefly.
Her husband was Sychaeus, the Phoenician
Who owned the most land—she, poor thing, adored him.
Her father joined her to him as a virgin,
In her first marriage. But Pygmalion
Her brother ruled; there’s no worse criminal.
Hate rose between them. In blind lust for gold,
Indifferent to his sister’s love, Pygmalion
Wickedly caught Sychaeus at an altar
And murdered him. He dodged and made up stories,
Cynically drawing out her anxious hope.
But in her dreams there came to her the vision
Of her unburied husband’s strange pale face.
He showed his wounded chest: the ghastly crime
329–­Apollo’s sister: Diana, virgin
goddess of hunting and the wilderness.

325

330

335

340

345

350

355

338–­Agenor’s city: Venus refers to
Carthage by naming Agenor, king of
Tyre, one of Dido’s ancestors.

. 16 .

BOOK 1
At the altar—monstrous secret—was laid bare.
He urged a quick escape. To aid the journey
Out of her country, he revealed where treasure,
A mass of gold and silver, lay long buried.
Alarmed, she made her plans, alerted friends—
All those who also loathed the brutal tyrant
Or lived in sharp fear. Seizing ready ships,
They loaded them with gold. The broad sea carried
Greedy Pygmalion’s wealth; a woman led.
They came here, where you now see giant walls
And the rising citadel of newborn Carthage.
They purchased land, ‘as much as one bull’s hide
Could reach around,’ and called the place ‘the Bull’s Hide.’
But who are you? What country do you come from?
Where are you going?” Answering, Aeneas
Sighed as he drew these words from his heart’s depths:
“Goddess, our whole sad story, from its start,
Would keep you here until the Evening Star
Closed off Olympus, bringing this day rest.
Through endless seas, we come from ancient Troy—
Perhaps you’ve heard that name. A storm has thrust us,
By its whim, to these shores of Africa.
I’m staunch Aeneas, heaven-­famed, from Jove’s line.
My fleet conveys the household gods I saved
To Italy, the homeland that I seek.
364–­a woman led: A striking Latin
phrase: dux femina facti, literally, “a woman
was the leader of the action.”
367–68: “as much as one bull’s hide
could reach around”: The Phoenicians
were offered as much ground as they
could surround with a bull’s hide, so
they cut the hide into thin strips to make
a single long string.

360

365

370

375

380

373–­Evening Star: The planet Venus,
called Vesper.
378–­from Jove’s line: Aeneas refers
to his Trojan ancestor Dardanus, son of
Jupiter and Electra.
379–­the household gods: The Penates, Roman deities of the home, closely
associated with the Lares (a family’s
guardian deities) and with Vesta, goddess of the hearth. Aeneas was credited
with introducing their worship to Italy.

. 17 .

BOOK 1
My goddess mother shows my fated way.
Of twenty ships launched on the Phrygian sea,
Seven survive the tearing waves and East Wind.
Europe and Asia banished me to wander
The wastes of Libya, a needy stranger.”
Venus cut short this grief, these grievances.
“Whoever you might be, I think the favor
Of the gods has brought you to this Tyrian city.
Simply go on from here, up to the queen’s door.
I have good news. Your friends and ships are safe.
The North Wind turned and brought them back. My parents
Taught me to read the sky, I hope correctly.
Look at that cheerful squadron of twelve swans.
Jove’s eagle swooped from heaven through the clear sky
And routed them. But the long row regrouped—
Those still aloft look down on those who’ve landed.
Their joyful rushing wings on their return,
Their cries, their crowded circles in the sky
Speak of the ships that carry all your people:
Arrived in port or heading in with full sails.
Go on, then, make your way along the road.”
She turned away. Her rosy neck now shone.
Her hair’s ambrosia breathed a holy fragrance.
Her belt fell loose, her robe’s hem swept her feet.
Like a true god she walked. He recognized
His mother and called after her retreat:

382–­Phrygian sea: As Phrygia was
the part of Asia Minor where Troy was
situated, “Phrygian” often means “Trojan.”
391–­North Wind: The wind god
Aquilo, associated with winter.
392–­to read the sky: A reference to
the Roman practice of augury, in which

385

390

395

400

405

the flights of birds were interpreted as
omens.
403–­ambrosia: Often represented as
the food of the gods; also used as a divine
unguent or perfume.
404–­her robe’s hem swept her feet:
Her short hunting tunic (line 320) transforms into the long flowing robe of a
goddess.

. 18 .

BOOK 1
“Why do you, cruel as anybody, taunt me,
Your child, with tricks and phantoms? Take my hand!
Let there be words between us as we are!”
Bitter, he set out toward the city walls,
But Venus hid the group in murky air,
In a thick cloud draped over them like clothing
That let nobody see or touch them; no one
Could ask why they were there or hold them back.
She soared off gladly to her home in Paphos,
To her shrine’s hundred altars, warm with incense
From Arabia and fragrant with fresh garlands.
Meanwhile they hurried, following the path.
They climbed a lofty hill above the city,
And looked down at the fortress straight ahead.
Aeneas was amazed at those great structures
Where huts had been: the gates, paved roads—the hubbub!
Tyrians feverishly laid out long walls
Or rolled up rocks to raise the citadel;
Men ringed their building sites with trenches, chose
Laws, magistrates, and sacred senators.
A port was being dug, a theater’s
Deep footing laid, great columns carved from cliffs
To ornament the stage that would be built there:
Like bees in spring across the blossoming land,
Busy beneath the sun, leading their offspring,
Full grown now, from the hive, or loading cells
Until they swell with honey and sweet nectar,
Or taking shipments in, or lining up
To guard the fodder from the lazy drones;
415–­Paphos: A coastal city on the
island of Cyprus. Venus was believed to
have landed here first after she was born
of sea foam; her Greek name Aphrodite
(aphros means “sea foam”) alludes to this
myth.

410

415

420

425

430

435

426–­Laws, magistrates, and sacred
senators: Vergil represents the rising city
of Carthage in Roman terms.

. 19 .

BOOK 1
The teeming work breathes thyme and fragrant honey.
“What luck they have—their walls grow high already!”
Aeneas cried, eyes lifted to those roofs.
Still covered by the cloud—a miracle—
He passed in through the crowds, and no one saw him.
Deep in the city is the verdant shade
Where the Phoenicians, tempest-­worn, unearthed
The sign that royal Juno said they’d find:
A horse’s head, foretelling martial glory
And easy livelihood through future ages.
Dido was building Juno a vast shrine here,
Filled with rich offerings and holy power.
The stairs soared to a threshold forged of bronze;
Bronze joined the beams; the doors had shrill bronze hinges.
Here a strange sight relieved Aeneas’ fear
For the first time, and lured him into hope
Of better things to follow all his torments.
While waiting for the queen, he scanned with wonder
The whole huge shrine—the city’s wealth it spoke of,
The toiling concord of the different craftsmen—
And saw Troy’s battles painted in their sequence,
A worldwide story now: Atreus’ sons
And Priam—and Achilles, cruel to both.
He halted, weeping: “What land isn’t full
Of what we suffered in that war, Achates?”
There’s Priam! Even here is praise for valor
And tears of pity for a mortal world.
Don’t be afraid. Somehow, our fame will save us.”
With steady sobbing and great streams of tears,

444–­A horse’s head: According to
Vergil, Juno indicated via an oracle that
Carthage should be founded where Dido
found the buried head of a horse. Car-

440

445

450

455

460

thaginian coins had a horse motif on one
side.
457–­Atreus’ sons: Agamemnon and
Menelaus.

. 20 .

BOOK 1
He fed his heart on shallow images.
He saw men fight around the citadel—
Trojan troops routing Greeks, Achilles’ crest,
His chariot bearing down on routed Trojans.
He wept to recognize, close by, the white tents
Of Rhesus: savage Diomedes stormed
And massacred the camp on its first night,
And seized the fiery horses there before
They tasted Trojan grass or drank the Xanthus.
Here Troilus—poor boy, no match for Achilles—
Who’d lost his weapons, clutched his reins, though sprawling
Behind his empty chariot and panicked
Horses. His neck and flowing hair were skidding
Over the ground. His spear point scored the dust.
The Trojan women, hair unbound, went begging
To the temple of implacable Athena.
They took a robe for her and beat their breasts.
She wouldn’t raise her eyes and look at them.
Three times Achilles dragged the corpse of Hector
Around Troy’s walls, then traded it for gold.
Aeneas gave a soulful groan to see
His comrade’s armor, chariot, and body,
And Priam stretching out defenseless hands.
He saw himself among Greek chieftains, fighting;
470–73–­Rhesus . . . Xanthus: Rhesus was a Thracian prince, killed by
Ulysses and Diomedes on the day he
arrived at Troy. According to prophecy,
if his horses drank from the river Xanthus and grazed on Trojan grass, the city
would never be taken.
474–­Troilus: A Trojan prince, son of
Priam. Vergil often directs sympathetic
attention to young casualties of war.
483–­Achilles dragged the corpse of

465

470

475

480

485

Hector: In Iliad 22 Achilles chases Hector
on foot around the walls of Troy before
he kills him, and in Iliad 24 he attaches
his body to his chariot and drags it
around Patroclus’ tomb. Vergil’s version
of Achilles selling the corpse comes from
another source.
487–­Priam stretching out defense­
less hands: A reference to the scene
in Iliad 24 in which Priam appeals to
Achilles to return his son Hector’s body.

. 21 .

BOOK 1
He saw black Memnon and the ranks of Dawn.
Penthesilea, leading Amazons
Who carried crescent shields, stormed through the throng,
Her gold belt tied beneath a naked breast—
A warlike girl who dared to clash with men.
Astounding pictures, rendering Aeneas
Of Troy transfixed, entranced—but while he stared,
Dido, the lovely queen, paced to the temple,
A large and youthful troop attending her.
On Eurotas’ banks or Cynthus’ heights, Diana
Keeps dances moving; there she’s flanked and followed
By a thousand clustering nymphs—they’re goddesses,
But she looms taller, shouldering her quiver
(A speechless joy engulfs Latona’s heart):
So cheerful Dido moved among her people,
Urging on work to make her kingdom strong.
Facing the doors, beneath the temple’s vault,
On her high throne she sat, flanked by her armed guards,
Gave judgments, made decrees, assigned the work
In fair proportions or by drawing lots.
But now Aeneas saw among the crowd
Fearless Cloanthus, Antheus, Sergestus,
And other Trojans whom the pitch-­black whirlwind
Had scattered, driving them to distant shores.
489–­black Memnon and the ranks
of Dawn: Memnon, the son of Tithonus
and the dawn goddess Aurora, brought
a force from Ethiopia to aid the Trojans.
490–­Penthesilea, leading Amazons:
The Amazons, women warriors, were
allies of the Trojans who arrived in the
last year of the war. Achilles fell in love
with their queen, Penthesilea, at the moment he killed her in battle.
498–­Eurotas: A major river that ran
through Sparta in the Peloponnese.

490

495

500

505

510

498– ­Cynthus: A mountain on the
island of Delos, birthplace of Apollo and
Diana.
502–­Latona: Greek Leto, mother of
Diana and her twin brother Apollo by
Jupiter.
510–­Sergestus: The ancestor of one
of the oldest elite families in Rome, gens
Sergia, of which the infamous Catiline
was a member. See 8.669n.

. 22 .

BOOK 1
He and Achates both were riveted
With fear and joy. They yearned to clasp their friends’ hands,
But didn’t, being startled and bewildered.
They hung back, watching from the hollow cloud.
What was the news, where were they moored, and why
Had they come here? Spokesmen from every ship
Clamored into the shrine with their petitions.
When he was given leave to speak, the eldest,
Ilioneus, peaceably addressed her:
“Your highness, we poor Trojans plead with you:
Jove let you found a city and bring justice
To lawless tribes. We wander on the sea,
Wind-­harried: save our ship from evil fires.
Spare decent people—think what we’ve been through.
We haven’t come to plunder Libyan homes
Or drive your herds away onto the beaches.
Arrogant crime is not for beaten men.
There is a place Greeks call Hesperia,
An ancient land, rich-­loamed and strong in war.
Oenotrians lived there, whose descendants call it
Italy, from king Italus, we’re told.
On our way there,
Stormy Orion heaved the surge against us,
Cruel South Winds drove us far into the shallows,
Scattered us under conquering waves and over
Stone barriers. We few rowed to your shores.
What race is this? What nation would permit
521–­Ilioneus: The oldest of the Trojans in Aeneas’ party.
530–­
Greeks call Hesperia: Italy,
named from the Greek word for “west”
(hesperos), as it lies to the west of Greece.
532–­Oenotrians: Native inhabitants
of Italy.
533–­Italus: King of the Oenotrians.

515

520

525

530

535

534–­On our way there: The first of
about fifty-­eight incomplete lines in the
Aeneid, usually seen as a sign that Vergil
did not have the chance to complete the
poem.
535–­Orion: The constellation Orion
(the Hunter) was seen as a bringer of
storms and rain.

. 23 .

BOOK 1
Such outrage? With belligerence, they’ve thrust us
From the beach; they yield no resting place on land.
You scorn the human race and human weapons?
Don’t doubt the gods remember good and evil.
Aeneas was our leader—none more just
Or faithful ever lived, no better fighter.
If fate still lets him breathe instead of sleeping
Among the shades of death, we’d have no fear,
And you would not be sorry for competing
With him in kindness. We have towns and troops
In Sicily. We’re kin of great Acestes.
Please, let us beach the fleet the winds have ruined,
And saw new planks, shape new oars in your woods.
Perhaps our friend and leader will return—
Then we can sail with joy to Italy.
If that won’t save us, and our loving father
Lies in the sea, and there’s no hope for Iulus,
We’d sail to Sicily—a king, Acestes,
A home is there for us across the strait.”
So Ilioneus spoke, and all the Trojans
Instantly roared approval.
Dido looked down and gave this brief reply:
“Calm your hearts, Trojans, put away your fears.
The threats to my new kingdom here have forced me
To place guards carefully on all the borders.
Who hasn’t heard about Aeneas’ family,
Or Troy—those brave men and the flames of war?
Phoenicians know the world! This town’s not set
Beyond the place the Sun God yokes his horses.
To Saturn’s fields, the great lands of the West,

568–­Beyond the place the Sun God
yokes his horses: I.e., beyond the known
world.
569–­Saturn’s fields: Italy, where the

540

545

550

555

560

565

Titan Saturn was exiled after he was deposed from rule over the gods in a coup
by his son Jupiter.

. 24 .

BOOK 1
Or the kingdom of Acestes next to Eryx,
I’ll send you off secure and well supplied.
Or would you settle here and share my kingdom?
The city that I found is yours, so land
Your ships. You will be equal to my people.
I wish the storm had brought your king Aeneas
Himself. But I will send some trusted men
Up and down Libya’s shoreline, since he might
Be cast up, wandering through woods or towns.”
Heartened now, staunch Achates and Aeneas
The patriarch were yearning to break free
Out of their cloud. Achates asked his leader:
“Goddess’ son, what new thoughts rise up in you?
Your fleet and followers are in safe havens.
Save for one man our own eyes saw the waves
Take under, it is as your mother said.”
He’d scarcely finished when the cloud that veiled them
Ripped apart and dissolved in open air.
Aeneas stood, his godlike face and shoulders
Flashing in clear light, since his mother breathed
Graceful long hair, the blushing glow of youth,
And happy shining eyes onto her son—
Like ivory beautifully carved, like silver,
Or Parian marble edged with tawny gold.
To the astonished queen and all the others
He quickly spoke out: “Here I am, you see—
Trojan Aeneas, saved from Libyan waters.
You are the first to pity Troy’s misfortunes.
We are the scraps the Greeks left. We have nothing.
Disaster pelted us on land and sea.
It could not be in all our people’s power
570–­Eryx: Mount Eryx, on the western side of Sicily.
593–­Parian marble: Marble quar-

570

575

580

585

590

595

600

ried from the island of Paros was highly
valued in antiquity, especially for carving
statues.

. 25 .

BOOK 1
(We are world-­scattered now) to thank you, Dido,
For making us the sharers of this place.
The gods and your own conscience must reward you.
Surely divine powers honor selflessness,
And justice does exist. What happy era
And what outstanding parents gave you birth?
While streams run to the sea, while shadows move
On mountain hollows, while stars graze in heaven,
You will have praise and honor, in whatever
Land calls me.” Now he reached out to Sergestus
And Ilioneus, with his right and left hands;
And then to brave Cloanthus and brave Gyas.
Phoenician Dido was amazed to see him,
And shocked by all his suffering. She spoke:
“What fate has hounded you through endless danger?
What force has brought you to our savage shores?
Are you the one born by the river Simoïs—
Trojan Anchises and kind Venus’ son?
Teucer in exile came to Sidon, looking
For a new kingdom, I recall, and seeking
My father, Belus’, help—he was away
Ravaging wealthy newly conquered Cyprus.
Since then I’ve known the tragedy of Troy,
The kings from Greece who fought there, and your name.
Your enemy himself admired Trojans
And claimed to share the ancient Teucrian line.
So come now, warriors, join me in my house.
Fate dragged me through much suffering myself
Until it let me settle in this land.
My own experience has taught compassion.”
She spoke, and led Aeneas to her palace,
619–­Sidon: A Phoenician city.

605

610

615

620

625

630

625–­Your enemy himself: Teucer, the
Greek warrior.

. 26 .

BOOK 1
Proclaiming sacrifices in the temples.
She sent his shore-­bound comrades twenty bulls,
A hundred giant boars with bristling backs,
A hundred fat lambs and their mothers too,
Gifts for a joyful day.
Regal, bright luxury equipped the house.
The feast was laid out in the central hall:
Embroidery exquisite on proud purple,
A mass of silver vessels, with reliefs
In gold of her heroic ancestry,
The whole long story of her ancient race.
Aeneas, with an anxious father’s love,
Dispatched Achates swiftly to the ships,
To give Ascanius news and bring him here.
All the fond father’s thought was for the boy.
Aeneas ordered gifts brought in, the salvage
Of Troy: a mantle stiff with gold-­stitched figures,
A veil trimmed yellow with acanthus flowers—
Greek Helen’s trappings, taken from Mycenae
When she set off for Troy and lawless marriage,
Glorious presents from her mother, Leda—
And the scepter once held by Ilione,
Eldest of Priam’s daughters; a pearl necklace;
And a crown’s double bands of gold and gems.
Achates rushed to fetch them from the ships.
But Venus was revolving new designs,
A new plan: Cupid, thoroughly transfigured,
And not Ascanius, would bring the gifts,
And twist a frenzied flame around the queen’s bones.
She feared this lying race, this doubtful refuge.
At evening, too, came thoughts of ruthless Juno
To trouble her, so she approached winged Love:
“My son, you are my strength, I rule through you.
You even scorn the father’s lightning bolts.

. 27 .

635

640

645

650

655

660

665

BOOK 1
Humbly I come to seek your holy aid.
You know your brother’s tortuous worldwide voyage,
How Juno’s spite will never let him rest.
You’ve shared my grief about this many times.
Phoenician Dido flatters and detains him.
Juno has sanctioned this—but for what purpose?
She won’t hang back at this decisive time.
So I’ll move quickly, shrewdly, trap the queen
In flames, and then no will on high can change her.
She will be mine, through passion for Aeneas.
Now listen while I tell you how to do it.
My darling prince, at his dear father’s call,
Is setting out to the Phoenician city
With gifts saved from the sea and Trojan flames.
I’ll hide him, tranced in sleep, on Cythera’s heights,
Or high above Idalium—my shrines.
He won’t know, he won’t stumble on the scheme.
You are a boy too: for a single night
Impersonate the features Trojans know.
Amid the royal banquet’s flowing wine,
Dido will be enchanted with you, hold you
In her lap, with doting kisses. That’s your chance:
Stealthily breathe on her your flame of poison.”
Love shed his wings, obeying his dear mother,
And strutted in a gleeful imitation.
Venus poured deep sleep through the prince’s body
And took him in her arms to the high groves
Of Idalium. Soft marjoram wrapped flowers
And breathed their aromatic shade around him.
In glee and deference, now, Cupid followed
After Achates with the royal gifts.
681–­Idalium: A small city on the
island of Cyprus where Venus had a
sanctuary.

. 28 .

670

675

680

685

690

695

BOOK 1
He found the queen among her splendid hangings,
Posed in the middle, on a golden couch.
Father Aeneas and the ranks of Trojans
Assembled and reclined on purple covers.
The slaves poured water on their hands, provided
Baskets of bread and finespun napkins. Inside,
Fifty maids honored household gods with hearth flames
And made the long feast ready course by course.
Two hundred men and women of the same age
Served wine and weighed the tables down with good things.
Phoenician guests flocked in the festive doorway
And took their places on embroidered couches,
Struck by Aeneas’ gifts, and struck by “Iulus”—
The god’s bright face and masquerading words,
The cloak and the embroidered yellow flowers.
The Punic Queen, cursed and disaster bound,
Brooded insatiably and burned with staring,
Enchanted by the presents and the boy.
He put his arms around Aeneas’ neck,
Which gratified the duped and loving father,
Then sought the queen. Her eyes and mind were fixed
On him. Poor thing, she held him in her lap,
The mighty hidden god. He thought of Venus,
His mother, and began to ease Sychaeus
Out of her mind, to try a living love
Against a heart long quiet and disused.
An interval; the tables are removed.
They set out giant wine bowls crowned with flowers.
A clamor rises, and their voices roll
Through the wide hall. Lamps hang from golden panels,
Blazing, and waxed-­rope candles rout the darkness.
The queen called for a bowl—heavy with gems
And gold—for unmixed wine. From Belus on,
The dynasty had drunk from it. Now, silence.

. 29 .

700

705

710

715

720

725

730

BOOK 1
“They say you govern visits, Jupiter.
Make this a glad day for our Trojan guests
And us, a day our children all remember.
Bacchus who gives us joy, good Juno, come!
Tyrians, kindly solemnize our coming
Together.” She poured out an offering,
Then took the lead—her lips just brushed the rim—
And, with a challenge, passed to Bitias:
He wallowed in the full, foam-­brimming gold.
The other leaders drank. Long-­haired Iopas,
Great Atlas’ pupil, struck his golden lyre.
He sang the wandering moon, the sun’s eclipses,
Fire and rain, how men and beasts were made,
The keeper of the Bear, the Twins, the Rain Stars;
Why winter suns dive in the sea so quickly,
What obstacle makes winter nights so slow.
Repeated cheers rose, led by Tyrians.
Unlucky Dido spoke of various things,
Drawing the night out, deep in love already.
She asked so many questions: Priam, Hector,
The armor of the son of Dawn, what breed
Diomedes’ horses were, how tall Achilles.
“Tell it all from start, my friend—the ambush
By Greeks, your city’s fall, your wanderings.
This is the seventh summer now that sends you
Drifting across the wide world’s lands and seas.”
731–­you govern visits: Jupiter traditionally protected guests and travelers, as
well as friendships between individuals
and alliances between communities.
738–­Bitias: Son of Alcanor, a companion of Aeneas.
740–­Iopas: A Carthaginian bard; his
singing at a banquet is imitated from
Odyssey 1 and 8.
741–­Atlas: A Titan condemned by

735

740

745

750

755

Jupiter to bear the heavens on his shoulders; also sometimes credited as the
founder of the science of astronomy.
742–­He sang: Iopas’ song deals with
natural history, and it reprises the songs
of Orpheus in Apollonius’s Argonautica 1
and Silenus in Vergil, Eclogue 6.
750–­She asked so many questions:
Dido’s questions include some posed by
ancient commentators on Homer.

. 30 .
