Arms and a man I sing, the first from Troy,
A fated exile to Lavinian shores
In Italy. On land and sea divine force
Shook him, through ruthless Juno’s brooding rage.
War racked him too, until he set his city
And gods in Latium. There his Latin race rose,
With Alban patriarchs, and high Rome’s walls.
Muse, tell me why. What stung the queen of heaven,
What insult to her power made her drive
This righteous hero through so much undoing
And suffering? Can gods’ hearts know such fury?
Carthage, an ancient Tyrian outpost, faces
Italy and the far-­off Tiber’s mouth,
Rich, and experienced and fierce in war.
This land, they say, was Juno’s darling. (Samos

1–­man: The Trojan hero Aeneas, son
of Anchises and the goddess Venus, the
protagonist of the poem. The Latin vir,
“man,” can also mean “hero.”
2–­Lavinian: Here, Italian. Lavinium
will be the first city Aeneas founds in
Italy, named after his future wife, Lavinia.
7–­Alban patriarchs: The noble
houses of Alba Longa, the city founded
by Aeneas’ son Ascanius; these included
the Julii; see 1.270–71.
10–­righteous: Latin pius, “devoted
to country, gods, and family.” This is
Aeneas’ chief character trait.

5

10

15

12– ­Carthage: a Phoenician colony
in northwest Africa that became Rome’s
greatest rival in the Mediterranean. The
three Punic Wars between Rome and
Carthage (264–146 BCE) ended with the
complete destruction of Carthage.
12–­Tyrian: Tyre is the Phoenician city
from which Dido fled to found Carthage.
13–­Tiber: The river on which Rome
was founded.
15–­Samos: An Aegean island with an
important temple of Juno.

.3.

BOOK 1
Came second.) There her chariot and arms
Were kept, and from the start she planned that Carthage
Would rule the world—if only fate allowed!
But she had heard that one day Troy’s descendants
Would pull her Tyrian towers to the ground.
A war-­proud race with broad domains would come
To cut down Africa: the fates ordained it.
Saturn’s child feared this. She recalled the war
She’d fought at Troy for her beloved Greeks
And also what had caused her savage anger.
Deep in her heart remained the verdict given
By Paris, and the insult to her beauty—
Ganymede raped and honored—that whole race
Of Trojans. Hot with rage, she barred from Latium
Those spared by cruel Achilles and the Greeks.
They tossed on endless seas, went wandering,
Fate-­driven, year on year around the world’s seas.
A weighty work, to found the Roman nation!
Sicily fell from sight. They sailed with joy
Into the open, bronze prows churning foam.
But Juno, with her deep, unhealing heart wound,
Muttered, “Am I defeated, done with trying
To keep the Trojan king from Italy?

23–­Saturn’s child: Juno, daughter of
the Titan Saturn.
26–27–­the verdict given by Paris: a
reference to the Judgment of Paris, the
Trojan prince who was asked to judge
which goddess, Venus, Minerva, or Juno,
was the most beautiful. He chose Venus,
who promised him the most beautiful woman in the world, Helen, for his
bride.

20

25

30

35

28–­Ganymede raped and honored:
The Trojan prince Ganymede was raped
by Jupiter, then given the honor of being
cupbearer to the gods. Juno is enraged by
her husband’s infidelities.
30–­cruel Achilles and the Greeks:
Aeneas and his small band of Trojans
are refugees from Troy, destroyed by
the Greeks following a ten-­year siege.
Achilles was one of the mightiest Greek
heroes, slayer of the Trojan prince Hector.

.4.

BOOK 1
Fate blocks me. But then why could Pallas burn
The Trojan fleet and drown the men it carried,
Merely to punish Ajax’ frenzied crime?
Out of the clouds she hurled Jove’s hungry fire,
Scattered the ships and overturned the sea.
Her flames impaled the man, her whirlwind snatched him,
And on a piercing rock he gasped his life out.
But I, parading as the queen of heaven,
Jove’s wife and sister, fight a single people
For years. Will anyone now bow and pray
To me and place his tribute on my altar?”
Blazing within, the goddess sought the land
Of thunderclouds, which teems with southern gales.
There struggling winds and howling tempests fill
The whole vast cave that King Aeolus rules.
He disciplines them, chains them in their prison.
They shriek with rage around the bolted doors;
The mountain echoes. Throned up on a summit,
Aeolus holds a scepter, checks their anger—
Without him, they would seize land, sea, and deep sky
To carry with them in their breakneck flight.
But the almighty father, fearing this,
Shut them in that black cave, heaped mountains on it,
And set a ruler over them to slacken
The reins or tighten them, strict in control.

39–­Pallas: The goddess Minerva (in
Greek, Pallas Athena).
41–­Ajax’ frenzied crime: During the
sack of Troy the Greek warrior Ajax the
Lesser raped Cassandra, a Trojan priestess, though she had taken refuge at
Minerva’s altar.
42–­Jove’s hungry fire: Jove’s (Jupi­
ter’s) daughter, Minerva, here borrows
her father’s weapon, lightning.

40

45

50

55

60

53–­The whole vast cave: According
to myth the winds were imprisoned in a
cave on the island of Aeolia. Vergil later
(8.417) identifies Aeolia with Lipari, a
volcanic island off the northern coast of
Sicily.
60–­the almighty father: Jupiter.

.5.

BOOK 1
Juno approached him now and made this plea:
“The king of men and father of the gods
Gives you the right to rouse and soothe the waves.
A race I hate sails the Tyrrhenian Sea,
Bringing Troy’s beaten gods to Italy.
Goad your winds into fury, swamp the ships,
Or scatter them, strew bodies on the water.
Fourteen voluptuous nymphs belong to me,
And the most beautiful is Deiopea.
Her I will make your own, in steadfast union,
If you will help me. She will spend her life
With you—the lovely children that you’ll sire!”
Aeolus said, “You merely must decide,
My sovereign. I must hurry to obey.
My reign—my modest kingdom—and Jove’s favor
You brought me. I recline with gods at banquets,
I rule the stormy clouds because of you.”
With his upended spear he struck a flank
Of the hollow mountain. In a battle charge
The winds pour out. They spiral through the world:
The East and South gales, and the mass of whirlwinds
From Africa swoop down, uproot the sea,
And send enormous billows rolling shoreward.
The men begin to shout, the ropes to squeal.
Sudden clouds snatch away the daylight sky
From Trojan sight. Black night roosts on the deep.
67–­Tyrrhenian Sea: A tract of the
Mediterranean Sea situated between Sardinia and Corsica and the Italian peninsula, named after the Etruscan prince
Tyrrhenus.
68–­gods: the household gods. See
1.379n.

65

70

75

80

85

83–­
The winds pour out: Descriptions of storms were a standard element
in epic poetry, from the Odyssey on, and
offered poets a chance to compete with
their predecessors.
84–­The East and South gales: The
wind gods Eurus (the East Wind) and
Notus (the South Wind).

.6.

BOOK 1
Heaven resounds, fires dancing in its heights.
The world becomes a threat of instant death.
A swift and icy terror numbed Aeneas.
He moaned and held his hands up to the stars
And gave a cry: “Three times and four times blessed
Are those who perished in their fathers’ sight
Beneath Troy’s walls. You, Diomedes, boldest
Of Greeks, could you not spill my blood and let me
Fall on the fields of Troy, like raging Hector,
Slain by Achilles’ spear, or tall Sarpedon,
Where Simoïs River churns beneath his ripples
Shields, helmets, bodies of so many brave men?”
A screaming northern gale blew past his wild words
And slammed the sails and pulled a wave toward heaven.
The oars broke, the prow swerved and set the ship
Against a looming precipice of water.
Crews dangled on the crest or glimpsed the seabed
Between the waves. Sand poured through seething water.
The South Wind hurled them three times at the rocks
That lurked midway—Italians call them altars;
Their massive spine protrudes—three times the East Wind
Dashed them clear to the shallows—awful sight—
And rammed them tight, and ringed them with a sand wall.
Before Aeneas’ eyes a towering wave tipped,

90–­
fires dancing in its heights:
Probably Saint Elmo’s Fire, a weather
phenomenon in which a bright blue or
violet glow appears around masts in inclement weather.
96–­Diomedes: One of the greatest
of the Greek warriors; he nearly killed
Aeneas at Troy, but Venus pulled her son
from the fight (see Iliad 5).

90

95

100

105

110

98–­Hector: The greatest Trojan warrior, whose slaughter by Achilles is depicted in Homer’s Iliad.
99–­Sarpedon: A Trojan warrior, son
of Jupiter.
109–­altars: The Aegimori, two small
rocky islands off the coast of Carthage.
111–­shallows: The Syrtes, dangerous sandbanks off the northern coast of
Africa.

.7.

BOOK 1
To strike head-­on the ship of staunch Orontes
And the Lycians, and whirled the helmsman out
Headfirst. The boat was whipped in three tight circles,
And then the greedy whirlpool swallowed it.
The endless sea showed scatterings of swimmers.
Planks, gear, and Trojan treasure strewed the waves.
The storm subdued the strong ships carrying
Ilioneus, Abas, brave Achates,
And old Aletes. Deadly torrents pushed
Through the hulls’ weakened joints, and fissures started
To gape. Now Neptune sensed with stern displeasure
The roaring havoc that the storm let loose.
Even the still depths spurted up. He raised
His calm face from the surface and looked down.
He saw Aeneas’ ships thrown everywhere,
Trojans crushed under waves, the plunging sky.
Juno’s own brother knew her guile and rage.
He called the East and South Winds and addressed them:
“Is this the arrogance of noble birth?
Without my holy sanction, have you dared
To churn up land and sea and raise these mountains?
Which I—but first I’ll calm these waves you’ve roused.
Later I’ll punish you with more than words.
Get out now, fast, and tell this to your ruler:
I was allotted kingship of the sea,
And the harsh trident. In his massive stone hall,
Home to you, East Wind, and the rest, we let him
Swagger, but he must keep that dungeon locked.”
114–15–­
Orontes and the Lycians:
Orontes is the leader of the Lycians, Trojan allies from Anatolia, a term that now
denotes the largest part of Turkey.
121–22–­Ilioneus, Abas, brave Acha­
tes, and old Aletes: Trojan companions
of Aeneas.

115

120

125

130

135

140

138–­kingship of the sea: Neptune
and his brothers, Jupiter and Pluto, split
rulership of the cosmos into three domains: the sky (Jupiter), the sea (Neptune), and the Underworld (Pluto).

.8.

BOOK 1
Faster than words, he calmed the swollen sea,
Chased off the mass of clouds, brought back the sun.
Cymothoë and Triton heaved the ships
Off jagged boulders. Neptune with his trident
Helped them. He freed vast sandbanks, smoothed the surface,
His weightless chariot grazing billows’ peaks;
As often, in a crowded gathering,
Crude commoners in rage begin to riot,
Torches and stones fly, frenzy finds its weapons—
If a grave, upright hero of the nation
Appears, compelling silence and attention,
Then he can tame their hearts and guide their passions:
Like this, the broad sea’s brawling sounds grew quiet
Under its lord’s gaze. Now beneath a clear sky
With slackened reins he rode the breezes onward.
Aeneas’ worn-­out cohort turned to struggle
Toward Libya because its coast was nearest.
A bay runs inland; island bluffs like walls
Create a harbor. From the deep, the waves
Break there and flutter out their separate ways.
Mammoth cliffs flank the place, and twin stone spires
Loom to the sky. Beneath them, smooth and safe,
The water’s hushed. A wooded backdrop quivers
Above; black-­shadowed, bristling uplands loom.
At the bay’s head, cliffs hang to form a grotto
With a clear spring and seat of natural rock.
Nymphs live there. At the shore no rope is needed
To hold worn ships, no hooked and biting anchor.
Aeneas landed seven ships, regrouped
144–­Cymothoë and Triton: Cymothoë is a sea nymph, daughter of Nereus
and Doris; Triton is a sea god.
148–­As often: This is the first of Vergil’s many similes in the poem; the po-

145

150

155

160

165

170

litical relevance to Vergil’s own times is
notable here.
151–­a grave, upright hero: This hero,
who sounds like Aeneas, is presented as a
role model for Roman leaders, including
Augustus, thanks to his pietas.

.9.

BOOK 1
From the whole fleet. The Trojans went ashore
In mighty, yearning love for that dry sand.
Dripping with briny water, they lay down.
To start, Achates struck a spark from flint
And caught the flame in leaves and gave it dry food
All around, till it blazed up through the tinder.
Downheartedly they took out the equipment
Of Ceres, and the soaking grain they’d rescued;
They had to sear it dry before they ground it.
Meanwhile Aeneas climbed a crag to view
The great expanse of sea. Where did the wind toss
Antheus, Capys, Caicus’ lofty prow
Hung with his arms—or any Trojan vessel?
There was no ship in sight. But three stags wandered
The shore. Entire herds came after them,
And grazed in one long column through the valley.
Taking a stand, he snatched the bow and arrows
That his devoted friend Achates carried.
He brought the strutting, branching-­antlered leaders
To the ground first, and then his arrows chased
The crowd in havoc through the leafy groves.
Exulting, he continued till he leveled
Seven large bodies for his seven ships,
Then went to share the meat out at the harbor,
Along with casks of wine, a noble gift
From kind Acestes to the crew departing
From Sicily. Aeneas spoke this comfort:
“Friends, we are all at home with suffering—
Some worse than this—but god will end this too.
177–78–­equipment of Ceres: Tools
used to convert grain into meal. Ceres is
both the Roman goddess of agriculture
and the Latin word for “grain.”
182–­Antheus, Capys, Caicus: Companions of Aeneas.

175

180

185

190

195

196–­Acestes: The son of a river god
and a Trojan woman named Egesta or
Segesta, Acestes is a king of Sicily who
hosts Aeneas and his Trojans before they
land at Carthage (5.30).

. 10 .

BOOK 1
You veered toward Scylla’s frenzy, and the deep roar
At the cliffs, you saw the rocks the Cyclops threw.
Revive your hearts, shake off your gloomy fear.
Sometime you may recall today with pleasure.
We fight through perils and catastrophes
To Latium, where divine fate promises
A peaceful homeland, a new Trojan kingdom.
Endure and live until our fortunes change.”
Sick with colossal burdens, he shammed hope
On his face, and buried grief deep in his heart.
Trojans tied back their clothes and made his quarry
A feast: tore back the hide, bared ribs and guts.
While some men pierced the quivering chunks with spits,
Others set cauldrons out or tended flames.
The food restored and filled them—the old wine,
The rich game—as they stretched out on the grass.
After the meal was done and cleared away,
They spoke with longing of their missing friends.
They hoped, they feared: were these men still alive,
Or past the end and deaf to any summons?
Loyal Aeneas, most of all, was groaning
Softly for keen Orontes, Amycus, Lycus,
For Gyas and Cloanthus—brave men, hard deaths.
Now they were finished. Jove looked down from heaven
At the sail-­flying waters, open flatlands,
The shores, the far-­flung nations. At the sky’s peak,
He fixed his gaze on Libyan territory.
200–201–­
Scylla’s frenzy, and the
deep roar at the cliffs: Scylla (a sea monster) and Charybdis (a whirlpool) were
traditionally located in the Strait of Messina between Sicily and Italy.
201–­the rocks the Cyclops threw: A
reference to Homer’s Odyssey 9, in which
the Cyclops Polyphemus throws boul-

200

205

210

215

220

225

ders at the ship of Odysseus (Ulysses) in
an effort to sink them.
210–­
tied back their clothes: An
anachronistic reference to a custom of
Vergil’s own time. Cumbersome Roman
togas needed to be drawn up and girded
close to the body for active work.

. 11 .

BOOK 1
His mind was anxious, busy. And now Venus
Spoke these sad words to him, her shining eyes
Filling with tears. “You, everlasting ruler
Of gods and men; you, fearsome lightning-­hurler,
What great crime did Aeneas and the Trojans
Commit against you? They have died and died,
But in the whole world found no Italy.
You promised that the circling years would draw
Teucer’s new lineage from them, Romans, chieftains,
With power everywhere on land and sea.
Father, what new thought turns you from this purpose?
When Troy calamitously fell, I weighed it
Against the fate to come, to my great comfort.
Yet fortune goes on pummeling these heroes.
When will you, mighty ruler, end their hardships?
Antenor fled, unharmed, from the surrounding
Greeks, to Illyria’s deep coves, clear to the kingdom
Of Liburnia and the Timavus’ source,
Where the sea breaks through nine mouths, and the mountain
Roars, and the echoing waves oppress the fields.
And there he founded Padua, a homeland
For Trojans, with a Trojan name, its gateway
Displaying Trojan arms. He has his rest there.
But we, your children, promised heirs to heaven,
Lost our ships—monstrous!—through Somebody’s anger
And treachery. We’re kept from Italy.
Where is our new realm, won through righteousness?”
235–­
Teucer’s new lineage: Teucer
was the original ancestor of the Trojan
kings. Through his descendant Aeneas,
the Romans traced their line directly to
the Trojan royal house.
242–­Antenor: A nephew of Priam,
king of Troy. After the city fell, he
founded a colony of Trojans at Venetia
(modern Padua).

230

235

240

245

250

243–­Illyria: The area of the west Balkans, east of the Adriatic Sea.
244–­Liburnia: A part of Illyria.
244–­Timavus: A river in Italy.
247–­Padua: A Trojan colony in
northern Italy.
253–­righteousness: Latin pietas, “de‑
votion to country, gods and family”; cf.
1.10n.

. 12 .

BOOK 1
The gods’ and mortals’ father gave his daughter
The smile that clears the sky of storms and kissed her
Lightly, and this was how he answered her:
“Take heart: no one will touch the destiny
Of your people. You will see Lavinium
In its promised walls, and raise your brave Aeneas
To the stars. No new thoughts change my purposes.
But you’re tormented, so I’ll tell the future,
Unwinding to the light fate’s secret scroll.
In Italy your son will crush a fierce race
In a great war. With the Rutulians beaten,
Three winters and three summers he’ll shape walls
And warrior customs, as he reigns in Latium.
His son Ascanius—called “Iulus” too now
(From Ilus, before Ilium’s rule ended)—
Will reign while thirty spacious years unroll
Their whirling months, and he will move the kingdom
To Alba Longa, heaving up strong ramparts.
Three centuries the dynasty of Hector
Will govern, until Ilia, royal priestess,
Conceives by Mars and brings twin boys to light.
And the wolf ’s nursling (glad to wear brown wolfskin)
Romulus will then lead the race and found
The walls of Mars for Romans, named for him.
For them I will not limit time or space.
Their rule will have no end. Even grim Juno,
Who now exhausts sea, land, and sky with terror,
268–­Ilus: The traditional founder of
Ilium (Troy).
272–­
the dynasty of Hector: Descendants of the Trojan royal house, via
Aeneas and his wife, Creusa, Hector’s sister, were said to have ruled Alba Longa
until the eighth century BCE, when

255

260

265

270

275

280

Romulus was credited with founding the
city of Rome.
273–­Ilia: Mother of Romulus and
Remus.
278–­For them I will not limit time
or space: Jupiter’s prophecy of everlasting empire has helped inspire colonialist
expansion through the centuries.

. 13 .

BOOK 1
Will change her mind and join me as I foster
The Romans in their togas, the world’s masters.
I have decreed it. Gliding years will bring
Anchises’ clan as rulers into Phthia,
Mycenae (once renowned), and beaten Argos.
The noble Trojan line will give us Caesar—
A Julian name passed down from mighty Iulus—
With worldwide empire, glory heaven-­high.
At ease you will receive him with his burden
Of eastern spoils. They’ll pray to him in heaven.
Then wars will cease, cruel history will grow gentle.
Vesta, old Faith, and Quirinus, with Remus
His twin, will make the laws. Tight locks of iron
Will close War’s grim gates. Inside, godless Furor,
Slavering blood on heaps of brutal weapons,
Will roar against the chains that pinion him.”
284–­Anchises’ clan: The Romans.
Their Trojan roots are emphasized;
though Troy was sacked, its descendants
will eventually conquer Greece.
284–85–­Phthia, Mycenae . . . Argos:
Greek settlements: Phthia was the home
of Achilles and his Myrmidon warriors;
Agamemnon ruled Mycenae; Diomedes,
Argos. Jupiter predicts the Roman conquest of Greece in the second century
BCE.
286–­Caesar: Not Julius but his heir
Augustus, previously called Octavian.
287–­Julian name: Augustus inherited the name of Caesar from his
adoptive father, Julius Caesar, his great-­
uncle by blood.
290–­eastern spoils: Augustus negotiated the return of lost battle standards
from the eastern realm of Parthia (in
modern Iran), a significant symbolic and
diplomatic achievement. This is prob-

285

290

295

ably also a reference to his decisive victory over Antony and the Egyptian queen
Cleopatra in 31 BCE.
292–­old Faith: Loyalty, here personified as a goddess, whose cult was established by King Numa early in Rome’s
history.
292– ­Quirinus: Another name for
Romulus; see 6.859n.
294–­close War’s grim gates: Located
in the Roman Forum, the gates of the
temple of Janus, the two-­faced god of
boundaries, were open in times of war,
closed in times of peace. They were
closed extremely rarely: in Vergil’s lifetime only in 29 and 25 BCE. See 7.601–15.
294–­Furor: Madness or frenzy, here
personified. The conflict between frenzy
and piety—duty to one’s family and duty
to the gods—is a central motif in the
Aeneid (see the Introduction).

. 14 .

BOOK 1
Concluding, he dispatched the son of Maia
To have the Trojans welcomed down in Carthage
With its new fort—since Dido, unaware
Of fate, might keep them out. The god’s wings rowed him
Through the vast air, to stand on Libya’s shore.
Since it was heaven’s will, the fierce Phoenicians
Peacefully yielded; most of all, their queen
Turned a calm, gentle face to meet the Trojans.
Steadfast Aeneas spent a worried night,
But at the light of nurturing dawn decided
To go and find out where the wind had brought them
And who or what—the land looked wild—lived here,
And bring what he could learn to his companions.
The fleet lay hidden in a tree-­hemmed inlet,
Under a rocky overhang enclosed
By bristling shade. He set off with Achates
And took two quivering pikes with iron blades.
Deep in the wood his mother came to him,
A girl in face and clothes, armed as in Sparta,
Or like Harpalyce in Thrace, outracing
The breakneck Hebrus with her harried horses—
A huntress with a bow slung, quick to hand,
From her shoulders, loose hair streaming in the wind,
Her clothing’s flowing folds tied over bare knees.
She greeted them and asked, “Please, have you met
One of my sisters roaming? Shouting, chasing
A boar whose mouth drips foam? She has a quiver,
And wears a spotted lynx skin and a belt.”
297–­son of Maia: Mercury, messenger of the gods.
302–­Phoenicians: Here, Carthaginians; see 1.12n.
305–­Steadfast: Another way of
translating pius.
315–­
armed as in Sparta: Spartan

300

305

310

315

320

women were trained in martial skills, including running, hunting, and riding.
316–­Harpalyce in Thrace: a mythical Thracian warrior princess who lived
in the forest.
317–­Hebrus: A river in Thrace, regarded by the Romans as wild country.

. 15 .

BOOK 1
Venus had spoken; now her son began:
“Young girl, I haven’t heard or seen your sister.
But I should call you—what? There’s nothing mortal
In such a voice or face. No, you’re a goddess.
Apollo’s sister? Daughter of a nymph clan?
No matter: have compassion, ease our hardship.
Where on earth, on what shores have storm winds thrown us?
Beneath which tract of sky? The wind and huge waves
Drove us to this strange land in which we wander.
I’ll slaughter many victims at your altar.”
She answered, “This I surely don’t deserve.
These quivers are what Tyrian girls all carry;
We all wear purple boots, laced on our calves.
This is the Punic realm, Agenor’s city.
Unconquerable Africans surround us.
Dido is queen; she came here out of Tyre,
Escaping from her brother’s persecution.
It’s quite a story, but I’ll tell it briefly.
Her husband was Sychaeus, the Phoenician
Who owned the most land—she, poor thing, adored him.
Her father joined her to him as a virgin,
In her first marriage. But Pygmalion
Her brother ruled; there’s no worse criminal.
Hate rose between them. In blind lust for gold,
Indifferent to his sister’s love, Pygmalion
Wickedly caught Sychaeus at an altar
And murdered him. He dodged and made up stories,
Cynically drawing out her anxious hope.
But in her dreams there came to her the vision
Of her unburied husband’s strange pale face.
He showed his wounded chest: the ghastly crime
329–­Apollo’s sister: Diana, virgin
goddess of hunting and the wilderness.

325

330

335

340

345

350

355

338–­Agenor’s city: Venus refers to
Carthage by naming Agenor, king of
Tyre, one of Dido’s ancestors.

. 16 .

BOOK 1
At the altar—monstrous secret—was laid bare.
He urged a quick escape. To aid the journey
Out of her country, he revealed where treasure,
A mass of gold and silver, lay long buried.
Alarmed, she made her plans, alerted friends—
All those who also loathed the brutal tyrant
Or lived in sharp fear. Seizing ready ships,
They loaded them with gold. The broad sea carried
Greedy Pygmalion’s wealth; a woman led.
They came here, where you now see giant walls
And the rising citadel of newborn Carthage.
They purchased land, ‘as much as one bull’s hide
Could reach around,’ and called the place ‘the Bull’s Hide.’
But who are you? What country do you come from?
Where are you going?” Answering, Aeneas
Sighed as he drew these words from his heart’s depths:
“Goddess, our whole sad story, from its start,
Would keep you here until the Evening Star
Closed off Olympus, bringing this day rest.
Through endless seas, we come from ancient Troy—
Perhaps you’ve heard that name. A storm has thrust us,
By its whim, to these shores of Africa.
I’m staunch Aeneas, heaven-­famed, from Jove’s line.
My fleet conveys the household gods I saved
To Italy, the homeland that I seek.
364–­a woman led: A striking Latin
phrase: dux femina facti, literally, “a woman
was the leader of the action.”
367–68: “as much as one bull’s hide
could reach around”: The Phoenicians
were offered as much ground as they
could surround with a bull’s hide, so
they cut the hide into thin strips to make
a single long string.

360

365

370

375

380

373–­Evening Star: The planet Venus,
called Vesper.
378–­from Jove’s line: Aeneas refers
to his Trojan ancestor Dardanus, son of
Jupiter and Electra.
379–­the household gods: The Penates, Roman deities of the home, closely
associated with the Lares (a family’s
guardian deities) and with Vesta, goddess of the hearth. Aeneas was credited
with introducing their worship to Italy.

. 17 .

BOOK 1
My goddess mother shows my fated way.
Of twenty ships launched on the Phrygian sea,
Seven survive the tearing waves and East Wind.
Europe and Asia banished me to wander
The wastes of Libya, a needy stranger.”
Venus cut short this grief, these grievances.
“Whoever you might be, I think the favor
Of the gods has brought you to this Tyrian city.
Simply go on from here, up to the queen’s door.
I have good news. Your friends and ships are safe.
The North Wind turned and brought them back. My parents
Taught me to read the sky, I hope correctly.
Look at that cheerful squadron of twelve swans.
Jove’s eagle swooped from heaven through the clear sky
And routed them. But the long row regrouped—
Those still aloft look down on those who’ve landed.
Their joyful rushing wings on their return,
Their cries, their crowded circles in the sky
Speak of the ships that carry all your people:
Arrived in port or heading in with full sails.
Go on, then, make your way along the road.”
She turned away. Her rosy neck now shone.
Her hair’s ambrosia breathed a holy fragrance.
Her belt fell loose, her robe’s hem swept her feet.
Like a true god she walked. He recognized
His mother and called after her retreat:

382–­Phrygian sea: As Phrygia was
the part of Asia Minor where Troy was
situated, “Phrygian” often means “Trojan.”
391–­North Wind: The wind god
Aquilo, associated with winter.
392–­to read the sky: A reference to
the Roman practice of augury, in which

385

390

395

400

405

the flights of birds were interpreted as
omens.
403–­ambrosia: Often represented as
the food of the gods; also used as a divine
unguent or perfume.
404–­her robe’s hem swept her feet:
Her short hunting tunic (line 320) transforms into the long flowing robe of a
goddess.

. 18 .

BOOK 1
“Why do you, cruel as anybody, taunt me,
Your child, with tricks and phantoms? Take my hand!
Let there be words between us as we are!”
Bitter, he set out toward the city walls,
But Venus hid the group in murky air,
In a thick cloud draped over them like clothing
That let nobody see or touch them; no one
Could ask why they were there or hold them back.
She soared off gladly to her home in Paphos,
To her shrine’s hundred altars, warm with incense
From Arabia and fragrant with fresh garlands.
Meanwhile they hurried, following the path.
They climbed a lofty hill above the city,
And looked down at the fortress straight ahead.
Aeneas was amazed at those great structures
Where huts had been: the gates, paved roads—the hubbub!
Tyrians feverishly laid out long walls
Or rolled up rocks to raise the citadel;
Men ringed their building sites with trenches, chose
Laws, magistrates, and sacred senators.
A port was being dug, a theater’s
Deep footing laid, great columns carved from cliffs
To ornament the stage that would be built there:
Like bees in spring across the blossoming land,
Busy beneath the sun, leading their offspring,
Full grown now, from the hive, or loading cells
Until they swell with honey and sweet nectar,
Or taking shipments in, or lining up
To guard the fodder from the lazy drones;
415–­Paphos: A coastal city on the
island of Cyprus. Venus was believed to
have landed here first after she was born
of sea foam; her Greek name Aphrodite
(aphros means “sea foam”) alludes to this
myth.

410

415

420

425

430

435

426–­Laws, magistrates, and sacred
senators: Vergil represents the rising city
of Carthage in Roman terms.

. 19 .

BOOK 1
The teeming work breathes thyme and fragrant honey.
“What luck they have—their walls grow high already!”
Aeneas cried, eyes lifted to those roofs.
Still covered by the cloud—a miracle—
He passed in through the crowds, and no one saw him.
Deep in the city is the verdant shade
Where the Phoenicians, tempest-­worn, unearthed
The sign that royal Juno said they’d find:
A horse’s head, foretelling martial glory
And easy livelihood through future ages.
Dido was building Juno a vast shrine here,
Filled with rich offerings and holy power.
The stairs soared to a threshold forged of bronze;
Bronze joined the beams; the doors had shrill bronze hinges.
Here a strange sight relieved Aeneas’ fear
For the first time, and lured him into hope
Of better things to follow all his torments.
While waiting for the queen, he scanned with wonder
The whole huge shrine—the city’s wealth it spoke of,
The toiling concord of the different craftsmen—
And saw Troy’s battles painted in their sequence,
A worldwide story now: Atreus’ sons
And Priam—and Achilles, cruel to both.
He halted, weeping: “What land isn’t full
Of what we suffered in that war, Achates?”
There’s Priam! Even here is praise for valor
And tears of pity for a mortal world.
Don’t be afraid. Somehow, our fame will save us.”
With steady sobbing and great streams of tears,

444–­A horse’s head: According to
Vergil, Juno indicated via an oracle that
Carthage should be founded where Dido
found the buried head of a horse. Car-

440

445

450

455

460

thaginian coins had a horse motif on one
side.
457–­Atreus’ sons: Agamemnon and
Menelaus.

. 20 .

BOOK 1
He fed his heart on shallow images.
He saw men fight around the citadel—
Trojan troops routing Greeks, Achilles’ crest,
His chariot bearing down on routed Trojans.
He wept to recognize, close by, the white tents
Of Rhesus: savage Diomedes stormed
And massacred the camp on its first night,
And seized the fiery horses there before
They tasted Trojan grass or drank the Xanthus.
Here Troilus—poor boy, no match for Achilles—
Who’d lost his weapons, clutched his reins, though sprawling
Behind his empty chariot and panicked
Horses. His neck and flowing hair were skidding
Over the ground. His spear point scored the dust.
The Trojan women, hair unbound, went begging
To the temple of implacable Athena.
They took a robe for her and beat their breasts.
She wouldn’t raise her eyes and look at them.
Three times Achilles dragged the corpse of Hector
Around Troy’s walls, then traded it for gold.
Aeneas gave a soulful groan to see
His comrade’s armor, chariot, and body,
And Priam stretching out defenseless hands.
He saw himself among Greek chieftains, fighting;
470–73–­Rhesus . . . Xanthus: Rhesus was a Thracian prince, killed by
Ulysses and Diomedes on the day he
arrived at Troy. According to prophecy,
if his horses drank from the river Xanthus and grazed on Trojan grass, the city
would never be taken.
474–­Troilus: A Trojan prince, son of
Priam. Vergil often directs sympathetic
attention to young casualties of war.
483–­Achilles dragged the corpse of

465

470

475

480

485

Hector: In Iliad 22 Achilles chases Hector
on foot around the walls of Troy before
he kills him, and in Iliad 24 he attaches
his body to his chariot and drags it
around Patroclus’ tomb. Vergil’s version
of Achilles selling the corpse comes from
another source.
487–­Priam stretching out defense­
less hands: A reference to the scene
in Iliad 24 in which Priam appeals to
Achilles to return his son Hector’s body.

. 21 .

BOOK 1
He saw black Memnon and the ranks of Dawn.
Penthesilea, leading Amazons
Who carried crescent shields, stormed through the throng,
Her gold belt tied beneath a naked breast—
A warlike girl who dared to clash with men.
Astounding pictures, rendering Aeneas
Of Troy transfixed, entranced—but while he stared,
Dido, the lovely queen, paced to the temple,
A large and youthful troop attending her.
On Eurotas’ banks or Cynthus’ heights, Diana
Keeps dances moving; there she’s flanked and followed
By a thousand clustering nymphs—they’re goddesses,
But she looms taller, shouldering her quiver
(A speechless joy engulfs Latona’s heart):
So cheerful Dido moved among her people,
Urging on work to make her kingdom strong.
Facing the doors, beneath the temple’s vault,
On her high throne she sat, flanked by her armed guards,
Gave judgments, made decrees, assigned the work
In fair proportions or by drawing lots.
But now Aeneas saw among the crowd
Fearless Cloanthus, Antheus, Sergestus,
And other Trojans whom the pitch-­black whirlwind
Had scattered, driving them to distant shores.
489–­black Memnon and the ranks
of Dawn: Memnon, the son of Tithonus
and the dawn goddess Aurora, brought
a force from Ethiopia to aid the Trojans.
490–­Penthesilea, leading Amazons:
The Amazons, women warriors, were
allies of the Trojans who arrived in the
last year of the war. Achilles fell in love
with their queen, Penthesilea, at the moment he killed her in battle.
498–­Eurotas: A major river that ran
through Sparta in the Peloponnese.

490

495

500

505

510

498– ­Cynthus: A mountain on the
island of Delos, birthplace of Apollo and
Diana.
502–­Latona: Greek Leto, mother of
Diana and her twin brother Apollo by
Jupiter.
510–­Sergestus: The ancestor of one
of the oldest elite families in Rome, gens
Sergia, of which the infamous Catiline
was a member. See 8.669n.

. 22 .

BOOK 1
He and Achates both were riveted
With fear and joy. They yearned to clasp their friends’ hands,
But didn’t, being startled and bewildered.
They hung back, watching from the hollow cloud.
What was the news, where were they moored, and why
Had they come here? Spokesmen from every ship
Clamored into the shrine with their petitions.
When he was given leave to speak, the eldest,
Ilioneus, peaceably addressed her:
“Your highness, we poor Trojans plead with you:
Jove let you found a city and bring justice
To lawless tribes. We wander on the sea,
Wind-­harried: save our ship from evil fires.
Spare decent people—think what we’ve been through.
We haven’t come to plunder Libyan homes
Or drive your herds away onto the beaches.
Arrogant crime is not for beaten men.
There is a place Greeks call Hesperia,
An ancient land, rich-­loamed and strong in war.
Oenotrians lived there, whose descendants call it
Italy, from king Italus, we’re told.
On our way there,
Stormy Orion heaved the surge against us,
Cruel South Winds drove us far into the shallows,
Scattered us under conquering waves and over
Stone barriers. We few rowed to your shores.
What race is this? What nation would permit
521–­Ilioneus: The oldest of the Trojans in Aeneas’ party.
530–­
Greeks call Hesperia: Italy,
named from the Greek word for “west”
(hesperos), as it lies to the west of Greece.
532–­Oenotrians: Native inhabitants
of Italy.
533–­Italus: King of the Oenotrians.

515

520

525

530

535

534–­On our way there: The first of
about fifty-­eight incomplete lines in the
Aeneid, usually seen as a sign that Vergil
did not have the chance to complete the
poem.
535–­Orion: The constellation Orion
(the Hunter) was seen as a bringer of
storms and rain.

. 23 .

BOOK 1
Such outrage? With belligerence, they’ve thrust us
From the beach; they yield no resting place on land.
You scorn the human race and human weapons?
Don’t doubt the gods remember good and evil.
Aeneas was our leader—none more just
Or faithful ever lived, no better fighter.
If fate still lets him breathe instead of sleeping
Among the shades of death, we’d have no fear,
And you would not be sorry for competing
With him in kindness. We have towns and troops
In Sicily. We’re kin of great Acestes.
Please, let us beach the fleet the winds have ruined,
And saw new planks, shape new oars in your woods.
Perhaps our friend and leader will return—
Then we can sail with joy to Italy.
If that won’t save us, and our loving father
Lies in the sea, and there’s no hope for Iulus,
We’d sail to Sicily—a king, Acestes,
A home is there for us across the strait.”
So Ilioneus spoke, and all the Trojans
Instantly roared approval.
Dido looked down and gave this brief reply:
“Calm your hearts, Trojans, put away your fears.
The threats to my new kingdom here have forced me
To place guards carefully on all the borders.
Who hasn’t heard about Aeneas’ family,
Or Troy—those brave men and the flames of war?
Phoenicians know the world! This town’s not set
Beyond the place the Sun God yokes his horses.
To Saturn’s fields, the great lands of the West,

568–­Beyond the place the Sun God
yokes his horses: I.e., beyond the known
world.
569–­Saturn’s fields: Italy, where the

540

545

550

555

560

565

Titan Saturn was exiled after he was deposed from rule over the gods in a coup
by his son Jupiter.

. 24 .

BOOK 1
Or the kingdom of Acestes next to Eryx,
I’ll send you off secure and well supplied.
Or would you settle here and share my kingdom?
The city that I found is yours, so land
Your ships. You will be equal to my people.
I wish the storm had brought your king Aeneas
Himself. But I will send some trusted men
Up and down Libya’s shoreline, since he might
Be cast up, wandering through woods or towns.”
Heartened now, staunch Achates and Aeneas
The patriarch were yearning to break free
Out of their cloud. Achates asked his leader:
“Goddess’ son, what new thoughts rise up in you?
Your fleet and followers are in safe havens.
Save for one man our own eyes saw the waves
Take under, it is as your mother said.”
He’d scarcely finished when the cloud that veiled them
Ripped apart and dissolved in open air.
Aeneas stood, his godlike face and shoulders
Flashing in clear light, since his mother breathed
Graceful long hair, the blushing glow of youth,
And happy shining eyes onto her son—
Like ivory beautifully carved, like silver,
Or Parian marble edged with tawny gold.
To the astonished queen and all the others
He quickly spoke out: “Here I am, you see—
Trojan Aeneas, saved from Libyan waters.
You are the first to pity Troy’s misfortunes.
We are the scraps the Greeks left. We have nothing.
Disaster pelted us on land and sea.
It could not be in all our people’s power
570–­Eryx: Mount Eryx, on the western side of Sicily.
593–­Parian marble: Marble quar-

570

575

580

585

590

595

600

ried from the island of Paros was highly
valued in antiquity, especially for carving
statues.

. 25 .

BOOK 1
(We are world-­scattered now) to thank you, Dido,
For making us the sharers of this place.
The gods and your own conscience must reward you.
Surely divine powers honor selflessness,
And justice does exist. What happy era
And what outstanding parents gave you birth?
While streams run to the sea, while shadows move
On mountain hollows, while stars graze in heaven,
You will have praise and honor, in whatever
Land calls me.” Now he reached out to Sergestus
And Ilioneus, with his right and left hands;
And then to brave Cloanthus and brave Gyas.
Phoenician Dido was amazed to see him,
And shocked by all his suffering. She spoke:
“What fate has hounded you through endless danger?
What force has brought you to our savage shores?
Are you the one born by the river Simoïs—
Trojan Anchises and kind Venus’ son?
Teucer in exile came to Sidon, looking
For a new kingdom, I recall, and seeking
My father, Belus’, help—he was away
Ravaging wealthy newly conquered Cyprus.
Since then I’ve known the tragedy of Troy,
The kings from Greece who fought there, and your name.
Your enemy himself admired Trojans
And claimed to share the ancient Teucrian line.
So come now, warriors, join me in my house.
Fate dragged me through much suffering myself
Until it let me settle in this land.
My own experience has taught compassion.”
She spoke, and led Aeneas to her palace,
619–­Sidon: A Phoenician city.

605

610

615

620

625

630

625–­Your enemy himself: Teucer, the
Greek warrior.

. 26 .

BOOK 1
Proclaiming sacrifices in the temples.
She sent his shore-­bound comrades twenty bulls,
A hundred giant boars with bristling backs,
A hundred fat lambs and their mothers too,
Gifts for a joyful day.
Regal, bright luxury equipped the house.
The feast was laid out in the central hall:
Embroidery exquisite on proud purple,
A mass of silver vessels, with reliefs
In gold of her heroic ancestry,
The whole long story of her ancient race.
Aeneas, with an anxious father’s love,
Dispatched Achates swiftly to the ships,
To give Ascanius news and bring him here.
All the fond father’s thought was for the boy.
Aeneas ordered gifts brought in, the salvage
Of Troy: a mantle stiff with gold-­stitched figures,
A veil trimmed yellow with acanthus flowers—
Greek Helen’s trappings, taken from Mycenae
When she set off for Troy and lawless marriage,
Glorious presents from her mother, Leda—
And the scepter once held by Ilione,
Eldest of Priam’s daughters; a pearl necklace;
And a crown’s double bands of gold and gems.
Achates rushed to fetch them from the ships.
But Venus was revolving new designs,
A new plan: Cupid, thoroughly transfigured,
And not Ascanius, would bring the gifts,
And twist a frenzied flame around the queen’s bones.
She feared this lying race, this doubtful refuge.
At evening, too, came thoughts of ruthless Juno
To trouble her, so she approached winged Love:
“My son, you are my strength, I rule through you.
You even scorn the father’s lightning bolts.

. 27 .

635

640

645

650

655

660

665

BOOK 1
Humbly I come to seek your holy aid.
You know your brother’s tortuous worldwide voyage,
How Juno’s spite will never let him rest.
You’ve shared my grief about this many times.
Phoenician Dido flatters and detains him.
Juno has sanctioned this—but for what purpose?
She won’t hang back at this decisive time.
So I’ll move quickly, shrewdly, trap the queen
In flames, and then no will on high can change her.
She will be mine, through passion for Aeneas.
Now listen while I tell you how to do it.
My darling prince, at his dear father’s call,
Is setting out to the Phoenician city
With gifts saved from the sea and Trojan flames.
I’ll hide him, tranced in sleep, on Cythera’s heights,
Or high above Idalium—my shrines.
He won’t know, he won’t stumble on the scheme.
You are a boy too: for a single night
Impersonate the features Trojans know.
Amid the royal banquet’s flowing wine,
Dido will be enchanted with you, hold you
In her lap, with doting kisses. That’s your chance:
Stealthily breathe on her your flame of poison.”
Love shed his wings, obeying his dear mother,
And strutted in a gleeful imitation.
Venus poured deep sleep through the prince’s body
And took him in her arms to the high groves
Of Idalium. Soft marjoram wrapped flowers
And breathed their aromatic shade around him.
In glee and deference, now, Cupid followed
After Achates with the royal gifts.
681–­Idalium: A small city on the
island of Cyprus where Venus had a
sanctuary.

. 28 .

670

675

680

685

690

695

BOOK 1
He found the queen among her splendid hangings,
Posed in the middle, on a golden couch.
Father Aeneas and the ranks of Trojans
Assembled and reclined on purple covers.
The slaves poured water on their hands, provided
Baskets of bread and finespun napkins. Inside,
Fifty maids honored household gods with hearth flames
And made the long feast ready course by course.
Two hundred men and women of the same age
Served wine and weighed the tables down with good things.
Phoenician guests flocked in the festive doorway
And took their places on embroidered couches,
Struck by Aeneas’ gifts, and struck by “Iulus”—
The god’s bright face and masquerading words,
The cloak and the embroidered yellow flowers.
The Punic Queen, cursed and disaster bound,
Brooded insatiably and burned with staring,
Enchanted by the presents and the boy.
He put his arms around Aeneas’ neck,
Which gratified the duped and loving father,
Then sought the queen. Her eyes and mind were fixed
On him. Poor thing, she held him in her lap,
The mighty hidden god. He thought of Venus,
His mother, and began to ease Sychaeus
Out of her mind, to try a living love
Against a heart long quiet and disused.
An interval; the tables are removed.
They set out giant wine bowls crowned with flowers.
A clamor rises, and their voices roll
Through the wide hall. Lamps hang from golden panels,
Blazing, and waxed-­rope candles rout the darkness.
The queen called for a bowl—heavy with gems
And gold—for unmixed wine. From Belus on,
The dynasty had drunk from it. Now, silence.

. 29 .

700

705

710

715

720

725

730

BOOK 1
“They say you govern visits, Jupiter.
Make this a glad day for our Trojan guests
And us, a day our children all remember.
Bacchus who gives us joy, good Juno, come!
Tyrians, kindly solemnize our coming
Together.” She poured out an offering,
Then took the lead—her lips just brushed the rim—
And, with a challenge, passed to Bitias:
He wallowed in the full, foam-­brimming gold.
The other leaders drank. Long-­haired Iopas,
Great Atlas’ pupil, struck his golden lyre.
He sang the wandering moon, the sun’s eclipses,
Fire and rain, how men and beasts were made,
The keeper of the Bear, the Twins, the Rain Stars;
Why winter suns dive in the sea so quickly,
What obstacle makes winter nights so slow.
Repeated cheers rose, led by Tyrians.
Unlucky Dido spoke of various things,
Drawing the night out, deep in love already.
She asked so many questions: Priam, Hector,
The armor of the son of Dawn, what breed
Diomedes’ horses were, how tall Achilles.
“Tell it all from start, my friend—the ambush
By Greeks, your city’s fall, your wanderings.
This is the seventh summer now that sends you
Drifting across the wide world’s lands and seas.”
731–­you govern visits: Jupiter traditionally protected guests and travelers, as
well as friendships between individuals
and alliances between communities.
738–­Bitias: Son of Alcanor, a companion of Aeneas.
740–­Iopas: A Carthaginian bard; his
singing at a banquet is imitated from
Odyssey 1 and 8.
741–­Atlas: A Titan condemned by

735

740

745

750

755

Jupiter to bear the heavens on his shoulders; also sometimes credited as the
founder of the science of astronomy.
742–­He sang: Iopas’ song deals with
natural history, and it reprises the songs
of Orpheus in Apollonius’s Argonautica 1
and Silenus in Vergil, Eclogue 6.
750–­She asked so many questions:
Dido’s questions include some posed by
ancient commentators on Homer.

. 30 .

BOOK 2

All faces now were fixed on him in silence.
Father Aeneas, on the high couch, spoke:
“Must I renew a grief beyond description,
Telling how Greeks destroyed the power of Troy,
That tear-­stained kingdom, since I saw the worst,
While playing no small part? Telling about it,
A Myrmidon, a Dolopian, a trooper
Of cruel Ulysses too would weep. The moist night
Falls to its end, the setting stars urge sleep.
But if you are so passionate to hear,
Briefly, of the death agony of Troy,
I will begin, although my heart shrinks back
From memory. The years of war had broken
The Greek kings; destiny had pushed them back.
They built a mountainous horse, with woven ribs
Of fir—Athena’s genius aided them.
‘An offering for a safe voyage home!’ The news spread.
They picked the bravest men. With stealth they shut them
Into the darkness of the flanks: an armed squad
Filling the vast, deep cavern of the belly.
Tenedos shows offshore, the famous island—
7–­Myrmidon . . . Dolopian: Greek
warriors from Thessaly. The Myrmidons
were under the command of Achilles,
the Dolopians of Achilles’ son, Neo­
ptolemus.
11–­Briefly: Aeneas’ narrative, modeled on Odysseus’ inset narrative in
Odyssey 9–12, occupies books 2–3.

5

10

15

20

13–­The years of war: The siege of
Troy lasted ten years.
21–­Tenedos: An Aegean island just
off the coast of Turkey, near the entrance
of the Dardanelles.

. 31 .

BOOK 2
Wealthy while Priam’s empire still existed,
Now just an inlet with its treacherous mooring.
They sailed there, to a lonely beach, and lurked,
As if they’d caught the winds out toward Mycenae.
The whole of Troy broke free of its long mourning.
We poured out through the open gates, delighted
To tour the Greek camp on the empty shore.
Achilles’ tent was here, Dolopians there.
The fleet moored there. Here was the battleground.
Some ogled that huge horse, gift of the virgin
Minerva for our ruin. Thymoetes
Was first to want it taken to our stronghold—
His own guile or the fate of Troy inspired him.
Capys and those who shared his good sense urged us
To hurl the treacherous bounty of the Greeks
Into the sea or set a fire beneath it,
Or drill into the secrets of its womb.
The fickle mob took opposite positions.
Now, leading his attendants in a crowd,
Laocoön rushed raging from the town’s heights.
‘Poor Trojans, have you lost your minds?’ he shouted.
‘You think they’re gone? Are any Greek gifts given
Sincerely? Don’t you know Ulysses better?
The Greeks are hiding in this wooden gadget,
Or else this is a siege machine they’ve built
For spying or alighting on our homes,
Or some such trick. Don’t trust the horse, my people.
25–­Mycenae: Here, Greece in general.
32–­Minerva: The Greeks pretended
to leave the Trojan Horse as an offering
to Minerva to guarantee safe passage
home.
32–­Thymoetes: A Trojan. His son

25

30

35

40

45

was put to death to avert a prophecy linking his birth to the downfall of the city;
Thymoetes’ suggestion here may be an
act of revenge.
35–­Capys: A companion of Aeneas.
41–­Laocoön: A Trojan priest of Neptune.

. 32 .

BOOK 2
Even when they bring presents, I fear Greeks.’
He hurled a massive spear with all his strength
Into the creature’s round and riveted belly.
The shaft was planted, quivering; the deep,
Recoiling womb sent out an echoing groan.
Had heaven willed it, had we all been sane,
We would have followed, shattering the Greek lair;
Priam’s high citadel would still be standing.
Shepherds approached the king now, clamoring,
Dragging a youth whose hands were tied behind him,
A stranger they had come across just now—
But he had plotted this, to open Troy
To Greeks. He was tough-­mindedly prepared
To trap us with his lies or yield to death.
Trojan boys rushed to view the captive, crowding
Around him, seeing who could taunt him hardest.
Hear how the Greek plot worked: this single crime
Shows them for what they are.
Amid those stares, unarmed and looking harried,
He stood and swept his eyes around our ranks.
‘Is there some sea, is there some land to take me?’
He cried. ‘I’m finished. What do I have left?
No place among the Greeks, and now the Trojans
As well are shouting for my blood in payment.’
At this our rage was calmed, our onslaught stifled.
But still we had to know—who were his people?
What was the news he brought? Why should we spare him?
He finally put his ‘fear’ aside and spoke:
‘All that I’ll say, your highness, is the truth,

49–­Even when they bring presents,
I fear Greeks: Timeo Danaos et dona ferentis; one of the most famous sayings in the
poem, often quoted.

50

55

60

65

70

75

76–­The line is thought to be spurious.

. 33 .

BOOK 2
Whatever happens. First, I am a Greek,
Sinon. If Fortune made me desolate,
She will not make me lie, cruel as she is.
Perhaps you’ve heard the name of Palamedes,
The glorious son of Belus, whom the Greeks
Slanderously, outrageously accused
Of treason when he stood against the war.
They drained his life’s light, but they mourn him now.
My father, who was poor, sent me in boyhood
As Palamedes’ page, since we were family.
While he still safely ruled, strong in the councils
Of kings, I had my share of reputation
And honor. But when sly Ulysses’ envy—
You know it—thrust him from this upper world,
I lived in mourning darkness, persecuted
And raging at my blameless patron’s death.
I was in fact a fool, and pledged revenge
If chance allowed, if I came home in triumph
To Argos. Hatred rose against my words.
This tipped me toward disaster. Now Ulysses
Kept threatening, accusing, scattering rumors,
Recruiting helpers in his plot against me.
He didn’t rest until the seer Calchas—
But no, it’s useless; you don’t want to hear it.
I’m wasting time. If Greeks are all the same,
Kill me, I’m Greek. The sons of Atreus
Would pay you well. Ulysses would be pleased.’
This only made us burn to hear it all,
In innocence of evil Argive guile.

81–­Palamedes: A Greek warrior who
was framed by Ulysses and wrongfully
executed as a traitor.
82–­Belus: A distant ancestor of Pala‑

80

85

90

95

100

105

medes, not to be confused with Dido’s
father.
100– ­Calchas: A Greek seer, tasked
with determining the will of the gods for
the army.

. 34 .

BOOK 2
Shaking with false emotion, he continued:
‘The Greeks were often yearning, often trying
To leave. The endless war had worn them out.
I wish they’d gone. The stormy winter sea
Or South Wind often turned them from the journey.
The horse of maple wood stood here already,
When the sky rang with even louder storms.
In doubt, we sent Eurypylus to query
Apollo’s oracle, and got bad news:
“You Greeks appeased the winds with virgin blood
When you first traveled to the shores of Troy.
Now you must offer yet another Greek life
For your return.” The common soldiers heard this
With horror. Icy trembling seized their marrow:
Whose death was it Apollo asked of them?
Ulysses dragged old Calchas in, with much noise
And bullying: What did the god decree?
Many foresaw the schemer’s brutal crime:
They saw what was to come but held their peace.
The seer in his tent refused for ten days
To give a name and send a man to death.
Finally, driven by Ulysses’ clamor,
He spoke. They’d planned it: I would be the gift.
They all agreed. Each, fearing death, was happy
To see it land on my pathetic self.
The ghastly day had come: the salted grain,
Fillets around my head, the ritual.
I broke these chains of death—yes, I confess it.
In the swamp, among the reeds, I hid all night,
Breathlessly waiting for the fleet to sail.
114–­Eurypylus: The son of Telephus,
leader of the Thessalians.
116–­virgin blood: Before setting out
for Troy the Greeks had sacrificed Iphi-

110

115

120

125

130

135

geneia, a daughter of Agamemnon, to
ensure favorable winds for sailing.
133–­Fillets: wool ribbons used
to decorate sacrificial animals before
slaughter; they were also worn by priests.

. 35 .

BOOK 2
I can’t return again to see my homeland,
Sweet children, and the father that I yearn for—
Perhaps they now may pay for my escape;
My weakness might just cost them their poor lives.
I beg you by those powers that know the truth,
By any pure trust placed in anything
Among us mortals, pity my affliction—
Pity the persecution of a good heart.’
We spared his life; we even pitied him.
Priam stepped in and had the man’s tight chains
And manacles removed, and spoke these kind words:
‘Stranger, the Greeks are lost to you: forget them.
You will be ours. But answer truthfully:
Who had the giant horse set up, and why?
Is it for worship or for making war?’
Greek cunning and conspiracy now caused him
To raise his hands—unbound now—to the stars.
‘By these eternal fires and sacred Troy,
By the altar and the evil blade I fled,
And the god’s ribbons that this victim wore:
It’s right to break the holy bonds of Greeks,
To hate them and make public everything
They hide. My nation’s laws don’t hold me now.
But keep your word, since Troy’s saved if my news
Is true, and proves rich payment for my safety.
All that the Greeks could hope for in this war
Was in the power of Pallas. Since the plotter
Ulysses and the godless Diomedes
Slaughtered the keepers of the soaring fortress,
And tore away that fateful effigy,
156–­the god’s ribbons that this vic­
tim wore: fillets; see 2.133n.
164–­Ulysses and the godless Dio­
medes: Ulysses and Diomedes are especially villainous Greeks in the Aeneid:

140

145

150

155

160

165

Ulysses as the inventor of the Trojan
Horse, Diomedes as the warrior who
almost killed Aeneas in the Iliad (see
1.96n).

. 36 .

BOOK 2
The Palladium, from its shrine, and even pawed
Her virgin fillets with their bloody fingers,
The tide is turned, the Greek cause slipping backward.
Their strength is broken by her stubborn anger.
She gave us signs, miraculous and clear:
We’d scarcely set her image in the camp
When its eyes flashed and burned, and salty sweat
Ran down it. From the ground it leaped three times
And shook its shield and spear—amazing story.
Calchas’ divine advice: escape by sea;
The Greeks would not raze Troy till they returned
To Argos for new omens and brought back
The deity they’d taken in their curved ships.
They’ve sailed home to Mycenae, to rearm
And gather gods as allies. They will cross
Back here and strike. So Calchas read the omens.
This statue pays for the Palladium,
An offering to violated godhead.
Calchas commanded that it be immense,
A mass of joined logs reaching to the sky,
And never pass the gates into your city
And save you, as the cult of Pallas did.
Handle Minerva’s gift impiously,
And ruin—may the gods turn back the omen
Against the seer—will meet the realm of Priam.
If your hands help it climb into your city,
Asia can hurl itself in war against
The walls of Pelops, in our grandsons’ time.’
Sinon’s false oaths and trickery convinced us.
167–68–­
Palladium . . . fillets: A
statue of Minerva, upon whose protection the city depended; its title is derived
from her Greek name, Pallas Athena.
The fillets are the ribbons sanctifying the
statue.

170

175

180

185

190

195

193–94–­Asia . . . Pelops: Here Asia
refers to Troy and the walls of Pelops to
Greece.

. 37 .

BOOK 2
The tears that he contrived did what Achilles
And Diomedes and ten years of war
And a thousand ships could not: they brought us down.
“Poor Trojans! Something still more horrible
Sprang up to fill our spirits with confusion.
Laocoön, the chosen priest of Neptune,
Was at the altar, slaughtering a large bull,
When over the calm sea from Tenedos
Came two huge coiled snakes—even now I shudder.
Breasting the water, paired, they sought the beach.
They reared among the waves, their blood-­red crests
Towering, while their bellies trailed the surface.
Their backs were flowing in enormous spirals.
The salt foam roared. But now they reached dry land.
Fire and blood were brimming in their eyes.
Their quivering tongues licked hissing mouths. We ran,
White with fear. They were aimed, in their incursion,
Straight at Laocoön—he wasn’t first, though:
Each gripped a tiny son of his, entangling
The body, gnawing on its wretched limbs.
Their father snatched a spear and ran to help.
Both serpents caught him in their giant whorls.
Their scaly length went twice around his waist
And throat; above him reared their heads and necks.
He fought to rip apart the knotted forms.
Their slime and poison-­black drool soaked his fillets.
His shrieks of agony rose to the sky,

198–­a thousand ships: A rounded
number; there are 1,186 in Homer’s catalogue of ships.
204–­two huge coiled snakes: It is
possible that Vergil knew the second-­
century BCE marble sculpture of Lao-

200

205

210

215

220

coön and his two sons, which Pliny regarded as superlative, and which inspired
the German Romantic critic and dramatist Gotthold Ephraim Lessing’s Laocoon:
An Essay upon the Limits of Painting and
Poetry (1766).

. 38 .

BOOK 2
As when a bull escapes the altar, shedding
The ax that was half-­buried in his neck.
The snakes now ducked away, made for the fierce
Tritonian’s temple in its lofty setting.
At the statue’s feet they hid, beneath the round shield.
Now a fresh terror twisted through our hearts.
We quaked; some murmured that Laocoön
Deserved this for the hideous crime of striking
The sacred wooden image with his spear:
‘Bring it where it belongs. Beseech the power
Of the goddess.’
We cut the walls and opened up the city.
Bare-­legged work put rollers underneath
Its feet, and tightened ropes around its neck.
The great catastrophe climbed to the fortress,
Pregnant with arms. Young boys and girls around it
Sang hymns and touched the cables in their joy.
It loomed into the middle of the town.
Heroic walls of Ilium, the gods’ home,
My country! Four times in the gate itself
It halted—weapons clattered in its belly.
We pushed on, blind with passion and distracted,
And set the monster in our sacred stronghold.
Cassandra spoke then, echoing the future.
But by the gods’ will, Troy could never hear her.
We wretches on our last day garlanded
The temples of the gods all through the city.
The heavens swung round, night leaped from the ocean
To wrap the earth and sky—and Greek deceit—
In its great shadow. On the walls the Trojans
Sprawled, muffled in a deep, exhausted sleep.
The Greek fleet came already in formation,
226–­Tritonian: An epithet for Mi‑
nerva.

. 39 .

225

230

235

240

245

250

BOOK 2
From Tenedos—the friendly moon hung silent—
To the familiar shore; and now the king’s ship
Signaled with flame. Sinon, protected by
Heaven’s harsh rulings, slipped pine bolts, birthed Greeks.
The horse gaped to the sky. The eager chieftains
Slid from the wooden cave and down the rope:
Machaon, then Thessandrus, Sthenelus,
Acamas, cruel Ulysses, Thoas, Peleus’
Grandson Neoptolemus, Menelaus,
And Epeos, who’d crafted this device.
They swarmed a city sunk in wine and sleep,
Slaughtered the guards, opened the gateway, let
Their comrades in, uniting ranks as planned.
It was the time when that first, sweetest sleep,
A gift from gods, slips into weary mortals.
I saw an anguished Hector in my dreams,
Streaming with tears and black with dust and gore.
His feet were swollen with the thongs that pierced them
When he was dragged behind the chariot.
How different from that Hector who returned
Wearing the plundered armor of Achilles
Or hurled our Trojan torches onto Greek ships!
His beard was dirty; dried blood caked his hair.
He bore the many wounds he got defending
His city’s walls. And in that dream I wept
And greeted that brave man with mournful words:
‘Light of our country, truest hope of Troy,
Why were you gone so long? What shore has sent us

262–­Peleus: The father of Achilles
and grandfather of Neoptolemus.
263–­Neoptolemus: The son of
Achilles, also called Pyrrhus, portrayed
by Vergil as more cruel and violent than
his father.

255

260

265

270

275

280

275–­the plundered armor of Achilles:
Hector acquired Achilles’ armor when he
killed Achilles’ friend Patroclus, to whom
Achilles had lent it.

. 40 .

BOOK 2
This longed-­for sight of you? So many died.
Your city and its people are worn out
With all their griefs. What undeserved disaster
Marred your calm face? What are these wounds I see?’
He took no notice of my empty questions,
But, sighing from his heart’s depths, only said,
‘Child of the goddess, run, escape these flames.
The walls are taken. From its pinnacle
Troy falls. Our country, Priam—gone. If my hand
Could have defended Troy, you would be safe.
Troy trusts its cult, its household gods to you.
Take them to share your fate, find room across
The sea to build high walls for them again.’
Then from the inmost shrine he brought the ribbons
And mighty Vesta and her ceaseless fire.
Confusion and distress spread through the fortress.
My father’s house was set far back and sheltered
By trees, and yet the martial din pierced through;
Now terror broke in, bristling with its weapons.
Startled from sleep, I scrambled to the rooftop
And stood there, motionless and listening:
It was like fire the raging South Winds send
Into the wheat, or torrents from a mountain
That flatten thriving crops (the work of oxen),
And drag whole forests headlong; on a high rock
A shepherd stands and stares in bafflement.
Here was plain evidence of Greek connivance.
The fire topped Deïphobus’ broad house
And brought it down. Ucalegon’s beside it

293–­its household gods: The Penates. See 1.379n.
297–­Vesta: Goddess of the hearth.
See 1.379n.
310–­Deïphobus: Helen’s second Tro-

285

290

295

300

305

310

jan husband, whom she married after the
death of Paris. Aeneas will meet his spirit
in the Underworld at 6.494–534.
311–­Ucalegon: One of Priam’s aged
counselors.

. 41 .

BOOK 2
Had caught. The wide Sigean strait shone red.
The shouts of men, the ring of trumpets rose.
Blindly I seized my weapons—senselessly—
But my heart burned to gather friends and rush
To some high place. Delirious rage pitched me
Ahead: how beautiful to die in battle!
The priest of Phoebus of the citadel,
Othrys’ son Panthus, clutching holy emblems
And routed gods and his small grandson, dashed
Through the Greek spears in panic to my door.
‘Where is the hardest fight?’ I asked, ‘Our strong point?’
Quickly he answered me, but with a groan:
‘This is the last day, inescapable
For our nation—Troy, the Trojans, and our glory
Are gone. Fierce Jupiter has given all this
To Argos. Greeks are masters of these flames.
The horse is looming, pouring troops among us.
Sinon in mocking triumph scatters fire
Everywhere, and as many thousand others
As great Mycenae sent are at the broad gates.
In alleyways the spears are poised for ambush.
A flashing line of sword points is prepared
To murder us. Guards at the entrances
Scarcely resist them in the first blind clash.’
The priest’s words and the gods’ power, felt within me,
Drove me to burning battle. The grim Furies,
The roars and shouts that rose to heaven called me.
I drew in comrades: Rhipeus, Epytus
(Great warrior) emerged by moonlight; Dymas,
312–­Sigean strait: Near the Sigean
promontory on the coast of Asia Minor,
close to the mouth of the Hellespont.
319–­Othrys’ son Panthus: A Greek
from Delphi whom Priam made a priest
of Apollo after his abduction to Troy.

315

320

325

330

335

340

337–­The grim Furies: Female Underworld deities associated with revenge,
they also sometimes personify the drive
to battle.

. 42 .

BOOK 2
Hypanis, and Coroebus, Mygdon’s son,
Strode with me—this young man had journeyed here
In burning and deranged love for Cassandra,
To fight, as Priam’s son-­in-­law, for Troy—
Poor man, his promised bride had raged and warned him:
He hadn’t heard.
Now when I saw them come together ready
For war, I urged them on. ‘Come, are you burning
To waste your courage, fighters, following me
Into a final clash? You see our fortune.
All of the gods who kept this kingdom standing
Have left their shrines and altars. These are flames
You fight. Let’s rush to die in that dense combat.
The beaten have one hope: to lose all hope.’
The young men’s frenzy grew. Like plundering wolves
Whose ravening stomachs drive them on a blind hunt
Through black fog while their cubs, with dry throats, wait
Back in the lair, we kept on pressing forward
Through our armed enemies, straight through the city
To certain death. The blackness swirled around us.
Who could describe that night’s catastrophes?
What tears could show our agony in full?
An empire, generations old, was falling.
We saw unmoving bodies sprawled and scattered
In houses, on the roads, on holy thresholds
Of gods’ homes. But not only Trojans paid
The price in blood. New courage seized our hearts.
Greeks in their triumph fell. Ferocious grief,
Terror, and every kind of death enclosed us.
Androgeus with his mass of troops was first
To meet us. He mistook us for his allies
346–­
He hadn’t heard: Coroebus
does not believe Cassandra: she is fated
to prophesy accurately and never be believed.

345

350

355

360

365

370

370–­Androgeus: A companion of
Aeneas.

. 43 .

BOOK 2
And shouted at us these congenial words:
‘Hurry, men! What’s this dragging of your feet?
Why hold back? All the rest are plundering
Troy’s flames. You’ve left your tall ships only now?’
No reassuring answers came to him—
He knew he’d stumbled into his opponents.
Stunned, he retreated from his words and us.
Like someone on a brambly path who treads
On a hidden snake and backs away in terror
From the blue swollen neck, erect in rage,
Androgeus looked at us and backed up, shaking.
We swarmed around them with our weapons, scattered
And killed them—they were panicked in that strange place.
So Fortune blessed our very first endeavor.
Coroebus was exuberant; he shouted,
‘Friends, we should take the road that Fortune’s favored
At the beginning: there we’ll find our safety.
Let’s put Greek armor on and swap our shields.
A trick’s as good as courage in a war,
And here’s our chance!’ He took the long-­plumed helmet
And shield with its fine blazon from the leader,
And put them on, and belted on the Greek sword.
Then Rhipeus too, and Dymas, and others
Eagerly armed with fresh loot. We set out
Among the Greeks, under Greek auspices.
In the thick dark we skirmished many times
With them, and we sent many down to Orcus,
While others sought their ships on sheltered beaches.
A truly craven few climbed back and hid
In the familiar belly of the Greek horse.
No one should trust the gods against their will.
Priam’s unmarried daughter, streaming-­haired,
398–­Orcus: The Underworld.
403–­
Priam’s unmarried daughter:
Cassandra, whose rape by the Greek war-

375

380

385

390

395

400

rior Ajax the Lesser sets Minerva against
the Greeks.

. 44 .

BOOK 2
Was dragged out of Minerva’s shrine. She lifted
Her burning eyes to heaven, uselessly—
Her eyes, because her tender hands were tied.
Seeing this put Coroebus in a frenzy.
He threw his doomed self straight against the captors;
We followed, rushing where the clash was densest.
But now, hurled from the temple’s lofty rooftop,
Trojan spears overwhelmed us, abject slaughter:
Our plumes, our emblems turned us into Greeks.
Roaring frustration at the young girl’s rescue,
The gathered Greeks attacked: ferocious Ajax,
Atreus’ two sons, Pyrrhus with his army—
As when a whirlwind breaks and sets the West Wind
Against the South and East who relishes
Driving Dawn’s horses. Woods roar, Nereus
Rages and foams, and from its floor the sea rears.
Even the men we’d ambushed in night’s shadows,
Routing them, chasing them all through the city,
Emerged now they could see through our disguise,
And also hear our language wasn’t Greek.
They swarmed us instantly. Coroebus fell first,
Before the mighty warrior goddess’ altar.
Peneleus killed him. Rhipeus fell too—
It was the gods’ will, though no other Trojan
Served justice better. Hypanis and Dymas
Died on their comrades’ spears. Apollo’s emblem
That reverent Panthus wore was no protection.
By Trojan ashes, by those fatal flames
I swear: in that collapse I shirked no fighting
Or other hazard. If my fate had been
To fall, I would have earned it. I was stranded
With Iphitus (weighed down with age) and Pelias

414–­Ajax: See 1.41n.
415–­Pyrrhus: See 2.263n.

418–­Nereus: A sea deity.

. 45 .

405

410

415

420

425

430

435

BOOK 2
(Lame from a wound Ulysses had inflicted).
We now heard shouts and ran to Priam’s palace,
Where what we saw drove all the other battles
And massacres in Troy to nothingness.
Implacably the Greeks attacked the building,
Crowding the door, their shields above their heads.
Ladders gripped walls beside the gates; feet struggled
Toward higher rungs, while left hands grasped the shelter
Of shields and right hands reached to seize the gables.
The Trojans ripped up parapets and whole roofs
For weapons of defense. They knew the end
Was coming: they would fight until it came.
They rolled down gilded beams, the ornaments
Of generations. Others drew their swords
And in a dense rank blocked the gates below.
So now we turned to bring the palace help,
To bring relief and new strength to the beaten.
There was a hidden door that linked two parts
Of Priam’s house, remote and at the back.
Andromache, poor thing, while Troy survived,
Went through there unattended to her in-­laws,
Taking Astyanax to see his grandsire.
This way I reached the rooftops, where the Trojans
Uselessly, pitiably hurled their weapons.
A soaring tower, by a steep drop down,
Was once our lookout onto all of Troy,
And the whole Greek encampment with its ships.
Now we assailed the tower’s upper stories,
Where joints were loose, and ripped it from its high perch,
Shoving it over. In a swift collapse
And roar it skidded down. On top of Greek ranks
455–­Andromache: The wife of
Hector.
457–­Astyanax: Hector’s infant son;

440

445

450

455

460

465

after the sack of Troy, he was thrown
from the city walls, as depicted in Euripides’ Trojan Women.

. 46 .

BOOK 2
It smashed—but others came. There was no pause
Of stones or other missiles.
Pyrrhus stood in the gateway to the courtyard,
Exultant, glittering in his bronze armor—
Just as a serpent, fed on poison weeds,
Emerges swollen from its winter burrow
And sheds its skin and gleams, its youth renewed,
And swirls its glossy length and rears its head
Straight toward the sun, and darts its three-­forked tongue.
Huge Periphas, Achilles’ squire and driver
Automedon, and all the Scyrian troops
Pressed up and hurled their torches to the roof.
Pyrrhus was at the front. He snatched an ax
To smash the bronze-­bound doors and tear their hinges,
First hacking out a panel for a hole
In the hard oak—a wide and gaping window.
Inside, the house: its atrium stretched back—
The ancient kings’ and Priam’s sanctuary—
And on the threshold stood its armed defenders.
Sounds of disaster and confusion echoed
Throughout the place, with women’s lamentations
And howls. Shouting struck the golden stars.
Terrified mothers roamed all through the mansion,
And clung to doorposts, pressing kisses on them.
Strong as his father, Pyrrhus came on. Locks,
Guards couldn’t hold him back. The battering ram
Made the door sway, unhinged, and topple forward.
The Greeks broke murderously through. They killed
The first defenders, swarmed through all the rooms.
A foaming, storming river is far gentler,
Which roars out past its mounded banks’ resistance.
477–­Automedon: The chariot driver
for Achilles and later for his son Neo­
ptolemus.

. 47 .

470

475

480

485

490

495

BOOK 2
Swollen, it tears through broad fields, sweeping herds
And barns along. I saw there, in the doorway,
Blood-­frenzied Neoptolemus, Atreus’ sons,
Hecuba with her hundred daughters, Priam,
Whose blood would foul the altar flames he’d blessed.
The fifty bedrooms (bountiful with grandsons),
Pillars that flaunted gold barbarian spoil—
Everything fell. Where flames failed, Greeks laid hold.
Perhaps you want to know how Priam died.
He saw his city fallen, taken, gates
Torn open, and the enemy inside.
On shaking shoulders he set armor—last worn
Decades ago—strapped on a useless sword,
And rushed to die in hordes of hostile soldiers.
Beneath steep, open heaven in his courtyard
Stood a great altar, where an ancient laurel
Leaned to embrace the household gods with shade.
Hecuba and her daughters ringed the high shrine
Like doves that rush for refuge from a black storm,
Futilely, and embraced the effigies.
The queen saw Priam in his youthful armor
And said, ‘Poor husband, what insanity
Dressed you for war? Where are you hurrying?
No such defenders, no such help is called for
Today—not even if my Hector lived.
Retreat here, let this altar keep us safe,
Or die with us.’ She took the old king’s hand
And in that sacred place she sat him down.
But look! The Trojan prince Polites ran
From Pyrrhus’ carnage, ducked through hostile spears.
Down the long porch, across the empty courtyard,
Wounded, he fled. Pyrrhus in bloodlust followed,
501–­
Hecuba with her hundred
daughters: Traditionally Priam and
Hecuba had fifty sons and fifty daugh-

ters; Virgil is counting
daughters-­in-­law here.

. 48 .

500

505

510

515

520

525

Hecuba’s

BOOK 2
Thrusting his spear, grasping beyond his reach.
Emerging in his father’s sight at last,
Polites fell. Blood, life gushed out of him.
Now Priam, though encircled by the slaughter,
Didn’t hold back from shouting in his fury:
‘If there is sight and conscience up in heaven,
The gods will give you your deserved reward,
Their thanks for this outrageous crime, for letting
Me see with my own eyes my own son’s murder.
You have defiled a father’s sight with death.
Achilles was your father? It’s a lie.
This isn’t how he fought. He had respect
For a trusting suppliant’s rights. He sent me back
To my throne with Hector’s corpse for burial.’
The old man threw a weak, unwarlike spear.
All it could do was clang across the bronze shield
And hang there by the leather of the boss.
Pyrrhus replied, ‘Then go tell Peleus’ son,
My father, how far short of him I fall.
Be sure he knows what hateful things I did.
So die.’ The king was dragged up to the altar,
Shaking and slipping in his own son’s blood.
A left hand gripped his hair. A right hand lifted
A flashing sword and sank it to the hilt.
As Priam watched Troy burn, its fortress topple,
Death took him, and he found his destined end.
But he had once been haughty lord of Asia,
Its lands, its peoples. On the shore a tall corpse
Lies nameless, with its head ripped from its shoulders.
542–43–­He sent me back . . . with
Hector’s corpse for burial: In the final
book of the Iliad, Achilles gives up his
rage and returns Priam’s son Hector’s
body for a proper funeral.

530

535

540

545

550

555

557–58–­On the shore a tall corpse
. . . from its shoulders: Priam’s corpse
is described in terms designed to evoke
the headless corpse of Pompey the Great
after his assassination on the shore of
Egypt in 48 BCE.

. 49 .

BOOK 2
That was the moment savage horror gripped me.
I froze. I seemed to see my darling father
In the king—the same age—with that savage gash,
Who gasped his life out. What about Creusa,
Alone—the house torn open—little Iulus?
I looked around to find some troops to help me.
Deserters! In their terror and exhaustion,
They’d jumped from walls or dashed into the flames.
Now I was all alone there—no, I saw
Through Vesta’s doorway, quiet, skulking, hiding,
Tyndareus’ daughter in the glare the flames
Shed for my ranging feet and searching eyes.
She feared the Trojans’ vengeance for their city,
Justice from Greeks, the outrage of a husband
Betrayed. She was a Fury for both lands.
A loathsome thing, she crouched behind the altar.
My heart caught fire: I had to punish her
For crimes that had destroyed my fatherland.
‘She’ll safely gaze on Sparta and Mycenae,
Where she was born? She’ll triumph as the queen?
She’ll see her father’s home, her husband, children—
Slaves will escort her, Trojan boys and ladies?
Priam is butchered. Troy burns. All this time,
Our shore has sweated blood. No—not for this.
To execute a woman brings no glory—
It is no triumph trailing praise behind it.
562–63–­Creusa . . . Iulus: Aeneas’
wife and son.
567–88–­The “Helen episode” is not
preserved in the most important manuscripts and may not have been written by
Vergil.
569–­Tyndareus’ daughter: Helen,
properly the daughter of Jupiter. Tyndareus, a Spartan king, is her mortal stepfather.

560

565

570

575

580

573–­Fury: Here a metaphor suggesting that Helen is the spirit of vengeance.
577–­Sparta . . . Mycenae: Helen was
originally the wife of Menelaus, the king
of Sparta. Mycenae here refers to Greece
in general or to Menelaus’ brother Agamemnon’s kingdom.

. 50 .

BOOK 2
Yet I’ll destroy this evil, bring it justice—
I will be praised—I’ll satisfy my heart
With flames of vengeance for my own who’re dying.’
My ranting fury carried me along—
Then, in pure brightness, through the night appeared
My gentle mother, never clear as now,
Revealing her divinity, the form
She has in heaven, and her hand restrained me.
Out of her rosy mouth there came these words:
‘My child, what pain could bring on such wild anger?
Why rave this way? Where is your love for us?
Where have you left Anchises, your poor father,
Broken with age? Ascanius, Creusa—
Are they still living? Everywhere around them
Greek forces mill. If not for my protection,
The weapons and the flames would have consumed them.
Give up your hatred of the lovely Helen
And wicked Paris, since it is the gods
Who are so cruel and topple wealthy Troy.
Look! I will take away the whole black cloud
That wraps around you mistily and dims
Your mortal sight. But have no fear and do
As I command. Have faith in me, your mother.
Here where you see a giant mass of rock
Shattered and strewn in rippling, dusty smoke,
Neptune has smashed the walls with his great trident,
And shaken and uprooted all the city.
Bloodthirsty Juno, girded with a sword,
Has seized the Scaean Gate and wildly calls
Her army from the ships.
There on the citadel Athena flashes
602–­Paris: The Trojan prince who
abducted Helen and thus triggered the
war.

585

590

595

600

605

610

615

613–­the Scaean Gate: The main gate
of Troy.

. 51 .

BOOK 2
Her ruthless Gorgon shield through burning cloud.
Father Zeus fills the Greeks with winning courage
In person, rousing gods against your troops.
Stop struggling and lay hold of your escape.
I’ll take you safely to your house’s door.’
She hid away then in the night’s thick mist.
Before me stood grim shapes, great deities
Hostile to Troy.
Truly, I saw the whole of Troy collapsing
In flames, and Neptune’s city overthrown,
Like an old mountain ash that several farmers
Hack with unresting axes in a race
To tear it loose. It menaces, its leaves
Tremble and dip, once its high top is shaken.
Wounds slowly weaken it. It gives a last groan,
Rips loose, drags devastation down the hillside.
Some god then led me from the roof, released me
From flames and weapons—all of these gave way.
When I arrived at my ancestral house,
Seeking my father first, and keen to take him
Into the towering hills before the others,
He said he couldn’t live past Troy’s extinction,
Wouldn’t bear exile. ‘You, with youth unbroken,
And hearty blood and staunch and solid strength,
Hurry, escape.
If those above had wanted me to live,
They would have saved my city. I’ve survived
One captured, fallen Troy—it is enough.
Say your farewell: this is my funeral.

616– ­Gorgon shield: Minerva’s
shield, the aegis, bore the decapitated head of the snake-­haired Gorgon
Medusa.
625–­Neptune’s city: Neptune and

620

625

630

635

640

Apollo were credited with building
Troy’s giant walls.
642–43:–­I’ve survived one captured,
fallen Troy: Troy had been captured once
before, by the hero Hercules.

. 52 .

BOOK 2
Some plunderer will show me mercy, ending
My life. To lie unburied is a small loss.
Uselessly, hated by the gods, I linger
Since heaven’s father and the king of men
Blasted me with his fire and windy thunder.’
These were his stubborn words. He wouldn’t move.
In tears we begged him—I, my wife Creusa,
My son, our household: ‘Don’t drag everything
Down with you, making heavy fate a rockslide.’
But he refused, fixed in his plans and place.
My hopeless urge was war again, and death.
Nothing in life remained to me but these.
‘Father, you thought I’d leave you here and run?
Abomination from a father’s mouth!
If out of towering Troy the gods leave nothing,
If you’re resolved to give this dying city
Yourself and us, the door to that stands open—
To Pyrrhus, soaked with Priam’s blood, who kills
The son and then the father at the altar.
Sweet mother, did you save me from the flames
Of war for this? The enemy in my home,
My son, my father, and Creusa lying
Streaked with each other’s blood, like slaughtered cattle?
My armor—bring it: we are not quite beaten.
Let me go back to battle with the Greeks.
We won’t all die today without revenge.’
Buckling my sword on, readying my shield
In my left hand, I was about to go.
My wife, there on the threshold, grasped my feet
And thrust our son, our little Iulus, toward me.
‘If you go out to die, then take us with you.
But if you think you have some hope in weapons,
Then guard this house. To whom do you leave Iulus,
Your father, me—your wife but soon your widow?”
Her words, her groans, her wails rang through the house—

. 53 .

645

650

655

660

665

670

675

BOOK 2
But an astounding portent intervened.
With Iulus in our arms, near our sad faces,
We saw a filmy, shining tongue of flame
Rise from his head; it licked his baby locks
And browsed around his temples harmlessly.
In our alarm we tried to slap the fire out
And drench the sacred burning of his hair.
Father Anchises gazed, though, toward the stars
In joy, stretched out his hands, and spoke these words:
‘Almighty Jupiter, if prayer can move you,
Look down on us; for our devotion, Father,
Grant us a sky sign now, affirm this omen.’
A sudden, crashing roar rose on the left side
While the old man still spoke, and through the dark sky
A comet hurtled, with a dazzling tail.
We saw it glide above the towering rooftops
And hide its brilliance in the woods of Ida.
Its tail still glowed, a long, light-­brimming furrow.
Its sulfur smoldered over all that country.
My father stood up, conquered by the truth.
In reverence for that sacred star, he prayed,
‘No more delay! Gods of my fathers, lead me:
I’ll follow. Save my family, save my grandson.
This was your sign, and Troy is in your power,
And I will yield and go with you, my son.’
Now through the walls the fire’s roar grew louder.
The blasts of heat were rolling closer to us.
‘Dear Father, let them set you on my shoulders.
I’ll carry you—you will not weigh me down.
Whatever happens, it will be one peril,
One rescue for us both. Our little Iulus
692–­on the left side: The favorable
side for omens.
708–­I’ll carry you: Aeneas shoulder-

680

685

690

695

700

705

710

ing his father and leading his son by the
hand became a famous motif in Western
art.

. 54 .

BOOK 2
Will walk with me, my wife will follow, far back.
Servants, pay close attention to my orders.
A barrow and an old deserted temple
Of Ceres lies outside the fort. Our fathers
Have long revered an ancient cypress near it.
We’ll all take separate paths but meet up there.
Father, you take our gods, these holy statues.
Smeared with the fresh gore of a dreadful battle,
I must not touch them but must first be cleansed
In running water.’
And now I pulled a tawny lionskin
Over my bending neck and brawny shoulders
And took my load. My little Iulus’ fingers
Were twined in mine; he trotted by my long steps.
Behind me came my wife. We went our dark way.
Before, I hadn’t minded hurtling spears
Or Greeks who massed against me from their ranks.
Now every gust and rustle panicked me
Because of whom I led and whom I carried.
Now I approached the gates. The journey seemed
Over, when suddenly a massive tramping
Sounded. My father, spying through the shadows,
Shouted, ‘Run—run, my boy! They’re coming close!
Shields flashing and the glint of bronze—I see it.’
Some hostile god then seized me in my terror
And stole my reason. Byways led me running
Beyond the streets of the familiar city.
And there my wife, Creusa—no!—was taken
By fate, or strayed, or else collapsed, exhausted.
Who knows? We never saw her anymore.
I didn’t think of her or note her absence
Until we reached the mound and ancient shrine
Of Ceres. When we gathered there, we found
Her gone—her husband, child, friends cheated of her.
I spared no god or man in my wild curses.

. 55 .

715

720

725

730

735

740

745

BOOK 2
Nothing in that whole city’s fall was crueler.
I left my son, my father, and my gods
In comrades’ care, deep in a twisted gully.
Bright in my weapons, I went back again,
Determined to run all those risks once more,
To risk my life in searching all of Troy.
I now approached the walls, the gates’ dim threshold
That I had fled from, searching out my footprints
Keenly in darkness, following them back.
The very silence filled my heart with terror.
I set out homeward—maybe she had gone there—
Maybe. The Greeks infested that whole building,
And instantly the flames, rolled by the wind,
Consumed the rooftop, shot insane heat skyward.
I passed to Priam’s palace and the fort.
On the forlorn porch, in the sanctuary
Of Juno, Phoenix stood with grim Ulysses,
Assigned to guard the spoils, heaped Trojan treasure,
Torn from the flaming shrines: the pure gold wine bowls,
The tableware and clothing of the gods
Were captured now. Mothers and children stood
In long lines, terrified.
I even dared to shout across the shadows,
Uselessly filling all the roads with grief,
Ceaselessly calling out Creusa’s name.
On I went, in my race to search the buildings—
But the sad apparition of Creusa
Came to me, taller than the living woman.
Shock choked my voice and stood my hair on end,
Yet what she said was soothing to my spirit:
‘Why do you rave and revel in this sorrow,
Sweet husband? It was by the will of heaven
762–­Phoenix: Accompanied Odysseus (Ulysses) on the embassy to Achilles
in Iliad 9.

. 56 .

750

755

760

765

770

775

BOOK 2
This came about. It was not right to take me:
The king of high Olympus will not let you.
In a long exile, you will plow a vast sea,
Clear to the West, where Tiber’s Lydian water
Serenely sweeps through warriors’ rich fields.
A thriving kingdom and a royal wife
Are yours. So weep no longer, though you love me.
I am a Trojan; Venus is your mother:
I will not serve Greek matrons in the cities
Of proud Dolopians and Myrmidons.
The gods’ Great Mother keeps me here—farewell.
We share a child: keep love for him alive.’
She left me, cutting short my words and weeping—
I had so much to say; her image faded.
Three times I threw my arms around her neck.
Three times her image fled my useless hands,
Like weightless wind and dreams that flit away.
When I rejoined my friends, the night was gone.
It startled me to find how many more
Had streamed there—mothers, men in their best years,
And youths had massed pathetically for exile.
They came from everywhere, supplied, resolved
To sail with me to any land I chose.
The Dawn Star rose past Ida’s highest slopes
And brought the day. The Greeks held every gate
To the city. There was nothing left to help us.
I picked my father up and sought the mountains.”
781–­Tiber’s Lydian water: The river
Tiber, in central Italy, flowed through
the land of the Etruscans, who were believed to have emigrated from Lydia in
Asia Minor.
788–­the gods’ Great Mother: The
mother goddess Cybele, whose cult worship originated in Anatolia, the same re-

780

785

790

795

800

gion as Troy, and spread to Rome in the
late third century BCE.
792–­Three times: the triple embrace
attempt comes from Odyssey 11; Vergil repeats this motif at 6.700.
801–­Ida: A sacred mountain near
Troy.

. 57 .

BOOK 3

“The gods’ decree brought down the Asian empire
And Priam’s blameless race. Proud Ilium fell.
Smoke rose from all of Neptune’s leveled Troy.
Prophecy drove us into empty lands
And far-­off exile. Toiling to build ships
In Phrygian Ida’s foothills near Antandros,
We didn’t know where fate would let us settle,
But mustered men. At summer’s start my father
Urged us to spread our sails to destiny.
I set out, weeping, from my country’s shores,
The plains where Troy had been. I swept to exile
With friends, my son, my family’s gods, the great gods.
Far off are spacious fields, the land of Mars
That Thracians till; once cruel Lycurgus reigned there.
Blood ties and ritual bound the place to Troy
While our luck held. I landed, set my first walls
On the curving shore, and formed a name from mine,
‘Aeneas’ Town’—but fate was hostile here.
Providing offerings for my mother, Venus,
And gods who bless new works, I planned to slaughter
A fine bull on the beach for heaven’s king.
3–­Neptune’s leveled Troy: Neptune
and Apollo built the walls of Troy.
6–­Phrygian Ida’s . . . Antandros: Antandros is a city at the base of Mount Ida,
on the opposite side from Troy.
12–­my family’s gods: The Penates.
See 1.379n.
13–14–­Mars . . . Thracians . . . cruel

5

10

15

20

Lycurgus: Thrace, in northeast Greece,
was associated with the war god Mars.
The legendary king Lycurgus persecuted
the worshippers of Bacchus and was
driven mad by the god.
18–­“Aeneas’ Town”: In legend,
Thrace was one of Aeneas’ stops. Cities
in the area were named after him.

. 58 .

BOOK 3
Nearby, a mound was topped with clumps of cornel
And myrtle bristling like a mass of spears.
I tried to wrench that greenwood from the ground
To roof the altar with the leaves and branches.
Then—hideous sight, almost unspeakable—
The first plant pulled away oozed drops of blood
From its torn roots, a filthy gore that tainted
The ground. A freezing tremor shot me through;
My blood ceased flowing, icy with my fear.
I didn’t stop but pulled a second stem,
To find whatever cause lay deep inside.
Again, black blood came dripping from the bark.
I prayed, confounded, to the rustic nymphs
And Father Mars, lord of the Getic fields,
To come and take away this omen’s curse.
At the third shaft, I made a harder try,
Struggling, with both knees planted in the sand.
Do I dare say this? From the barrow’s depths
I heard somebody sob and call to me:
‘Aeneas, no—don’t maul a buried corpse,
Polluting your clean hands. Troy gave me life,
You know me—me, not wood that oozes blood.
Run from this cruel land, from its greedy shore,
Since I am Polydorus, and a woodland
Of iron pierced me—here the sharp spears grow.’
Confused and terrified, I stood unmoving,
My hair on end, words clotted in my throat.
Poor Priam secretly sent Polydorus
And a great treasure to the Thracian king
Years ago, in his fear of weapons’ failing
To save our city from the siege that ringed it.
But when the luckless Trojan power was broken,
35– ­Getic fields: The Getae were a
Thracian tribe.

. 59 .

25

30

35

40

45

50

BOOK 3
The Thracian joined in Agamemnon’s victory:
He broke with honor, killing Polydorus
To loot the gold. What will that hellish hunger
Not drive a man to do? When I’d stopped quaking,
I told our leaders—first of all my father—
About the omen here and sought advice.
They agreed: from this evil land, defiling
Guest-­friendship, the South Winds should take our fleet.
We gave fresh rites to Polydorus, raising
A large tomb on the mound. His spirits got
Their altar, grim with cypress and dark fillets.
The Trojan women stood with loosened hair.
We brought him cups of warm and frothing milk,
Basins of sacred blood. We roused his spirit
With one last shout, then laid it in the tomb.
When we could trust the sea, and the wind called us
With gentle rustling to the placid deep,
The men massed on the shore and launched the ships.
The port, the land, the cities dipped behind.
“A sacred land lies in the sea, the favorite
Of the Nereids’ mother and Aegean Neptune.
It floated loose until the thankful Archer
Lashed Mykonos and high Gyarus to it:
It could be lived on then, and flout the winds.
Here I now sailed. The bay serenely welcomed
Our weary crews. We hailed Apollo’s town.
King Anius, who was the god’s priest too,

55

60

65

70

75

80

60–61–­
evil land, defiling guest-­ free-­floating island in place in the Cyfriendship: Guests were held to be sac- cladic Islands to reward the Delians for
allowing his mother, Latona, to give
rosanct in the ancient world.
73–­A sacred land: Delos was sacred birth to him and his sister Diana there.
to marine deities, including Doris,
80–­Anius: King of Delos and priest
mother of the Nereids. Apollo fixed the of Apollo.

. 60 .

BOOK 3
Fillets and laurels on his sacred head,
Hurried to meet Anchises, his old friend.
He clasped our hands and took us to his house.
The shrine was built of ancient rock. I prayed,
‘Give us a home, Apollo. We are worn out.
Give refugees from Greeks and cruel Achilles
Enduring city walls; grant us descendants.
Where must we go and settle? Under what guide?
Grant us an omen, Father! Fill our hearts!’
Suddenly, everything appeared to shake:
The door, the laurels, the entire hill.
The secret place lay bare; the tripod roared.
We fell and hid our faces. Now a voice came:
‘Enduring Trojans, where your race was born,
A fertile, loving land will take you back
As nurslings. Seek out your primeval mother.
Aeneas’ sons will rule in every country—
His children’s children through the generations.’
These were the god’s words. Jubilant wild shouting
Broke out. Where was the town, we asked, that Phoebus
Was summoning us back to as we wandered?
My father then considered the traditions.
‘Noblemen, hear what we can hope for now.
Crete, great Jove’s island, stretches in mid-­ocean.
There in Mount Ida’s land our race arose.
Crete has a hundred cities, wealthy empires,
And Teucer, our progenitor, set sail
89–­Father: Apollo’s Delian title was
“begetter.”
92–­tripod: A sacred three-­
legged
stand associated with the oracles of
Apollo.
104–5–­Crete . . . Mount Ida: Jupiter
(Jove) was born on Crete, at the base of
Mount Ida.

85

90

95

100

105

107–­Teucer: Apollo has directed the
Trojans to settle in the land of their ancestors. He means Italy, the original
home of Dardanus, but Anchises thinks
he means Crete, the original home of
Teucer.

. 61 .

BOOK 3
From there—if I remember what they tell—
And found a place to reign. Troy’s citadel
Was not yet built; its people lived in deep vales.
From Crete came Mother Cybele, Corybants
With cymbals, faithful silence for her rites
In Ida’s woods, tame, chariot-­yoked lions.
We need to hurry where the gods direct us.
Give offerings to the winds and sail for Knossos.
It isn’t far. With Jupiter to help us,
The fleet will moor there when the third dawn breaks.’
And then he slaughtered what he owed the gods:
A bull for Neptune, one for bright Apollo,
The good West Wind’s white sheep, the Storm God’s black one.
The rumor came: Idomeneus banished
From his ancestral kingdom, Crete deserted,
Empty of enemies, homes for the taking.
We left the Delian port and skimmed the sea
Past Naxos’ Bacchic ridges, green Reed Island,
Then Olive Island, snow-­white Paros, scatter
Of Cyclades. We threaded shallow roiled straits.
Each sailor fought to do the most. They shouted
For speed to Crete, the country of our fathers.
A fair wind rose behind to waft our vessels

111–­Mother Cybele, Corybants: Cybele, the mother goddess, drove a chariot
pulled by lions; her ecstatic followers
were the Corybants. There is a Mount
Ida in her homeland of Phrygia, near
Troy, as well as one on Crete, so she was
associated with both regions.
115–­Knossos: The principal city of
Crete.
120–­West Wind: The Zephyr.
121–­Idomeneus: The king of Crete

110

115

120

125

130

and enemy of the Trojans. He fought
with the Greeks at Troy and was exiled
on his return home for sacrificing his son
after foolishly promising to sacrifice the
first thing he saw.
125–27–­Naxos’ Bacchic ridges, green
Reed Island . . . Olive Island, snow-­
white Paros . . . Cyclades: They sail
through the island group in the Aegean
known as the Cyclades. The largest,
Naxos, was sacred to Bacchus.

. 62 .

BOOK 3
To where the Curetes lived long ago.
Craving to stay, I founded Pergamum—
A welcome name—and urged my race to love
Their homes and fill the citadels with rooftops.
The ships were on the shore and almost dry,
Marriage and farming occupied the young,
Laws and allotments me; when suddenly
That sky rained wretched rotting sickness on us.
The trees and fields grew only death that year.
We gave our sweet breath up or dragged our lives out.
And then the sterile Dog Star scorched the fields.
Shoots withered, and the sick crops gave no food.
My father urged a crossing back to plead
Once more at Phoebus’ oracle and ask him
When he would grant an end to our exhaustion,
Where we should look for help, where we should go.
“Night had brought sleep to all who live on earth.
The sacred forms of Trojan household gods
That I had rescued from the city’s flames
Appeared before my eyes as I was lying
Asleep. They stood out plainly in the bright light
The moon was pouring through my open window.
They seemed to speak to me and soothe my worry.
‘What the god would have told you at his shrine,
He kindly sends by us, right to your threshold.
When Troy was burned, we soldiered after you.
We crossed the swelling water with your fleet,
And we will raise your children to the stars
And give the wide earth to your city. High walls
131–­Curetes: Priests of the goddess
Cybele.
132–­Pergamum: The citadel of Troy.

135

140

145

150

155

141–­the sterile Dog Star: Sirius, a
star associated with drought, madness,
and the “dog days” of summer.

. 63 .

BOOK 3
For your high gods you’ll need there. Do not shirk
Hard travel to a new home, since Apollo
Did not intend your settling here in Crete.
There is a place Greeks call Hesperia,
An old land, strong in war and rich in loam.
Oenotrians lived there, whose descendants take
Their name, it’s said, from Italus the king.
This is our own home. Dardanus was born here,
And our clan’s founder, Father Iasius.
Wake! Hurry! Go with joy to your old father.
There is no question this time: he must go
To Italy. Jove denies you land in Crete.’
The sight and sound of gods dumbfounded me.
(It was no dream, you see. I recognized
Expressions, garlands, faces there before me,
And my whole body dripped with chilly sweat.)
I leapt from bed and raised a suppliant’s hands
And voice to heaven, poured unwatered wine
Onto the hearth. These rites with joy completed,
I told Anchises all that had transpired.
He saw we had a double origin;
He’d made a fresh mistake about old places.
‘Child, how the destiny of Troy torments you!
Only Cassandra gave us such predictions.
Now I recall she often said our race
Was meant to have “the West” or “Italy.”
But who’d imagine Trojans going there?
And who believed Cassandra in those days?
Have faith in Phoebus—now he sets us right.’
165–66–­Oenotrians . . . Italus: The
Oenotrians were an ancient people of
unknown origin who lived in southern
Italy; Italus was their king.
167–68–­Dardanus . . . Iasius: Dardanus and Iasius, or Iasus, his older

160

165

170

175

180

185

brother, were founding ancestors of the
Trojans.
177–­unwatered wine: Romans diluted their drinking wine with water, but
only pure wine was appropriate to offer
to deities.

. 64 .

BOOK 3
With shouts of triumph all of us obeyed.
We left another home, but some remained.
Now sails unfurled. Light hulls skimmed untold water.
“A long way out, with nothing in our sight
Anywhere but the ocean and the sky,
A blue-­black mass of rain and stormy midnight
Loomed in; the water bristled in the dark wind.
All that colossal surface rose in arcs,
Flinging and strewing us across itself.
The storm clouds muffled day, the soaking night
Hid the sky, fire kept shattering the vapor.
Slammed off our course, we groped through blinding waves.
That sky, said Palinurus, muddled night
With day: he’d lost his way across the sea.
For three long days (we thought—the gloom confused us)
We wandered, and as many starless nights.
On the fourth day at last we saw land rising:
Some distant mountains and a curl of smoke.
We lowered sails. The sailors’ plunging rowing
Raised curls of foam and swept us on the blue.
So I was saved, and reached the Turning Islands,
A Greek name. In the wide Ionian
They are now fixed, and home to grim Celaeno
And other Harpies, who have all been banished
From Phineus’ palace, routed from his banquet.
The fury of the gods has raised no horror,
No plague more vicious from the waves of Styx.
209–13–­
the Turning Islands . . .
Celaeno and other Harpies . . . Phineus’
palace: The Harpies (literally “snatchers”) were woman-­faced birds, sent as
punishment by Jupiter to steal and pollute King Phineus’ banquets. The Argonauts drove them to the Turning Islands

190

195

200

205

210

215

(the Strophades), so named because the
Argonauts were “turned back” there in
their pursuit by the rainbow goddess Iris,
who promised that the Harpies would
leave King Phineus alone.
215–­Styx: A river in the Underworld.

. 65 .

BOOK 3
They have girls’ features, but their stomachs drip
Revolting filth, their hands have claws, their faces
Are always pale with hunger.
We put to land there. Just beyond the harbor,
We saw a sleek herd scattered in a meadow—
Cattle and goats with no one guarding them.
We drew our swords, swarmed in, and called on Jove
And other gods to share our spoils. The curved shore
Filled with our couches as we cooked a feast.
A terrifying swoop out of the mountains:
The Harpies with their clanking wings came screeching
To loot the food. All that they touched was smeared
With filth. We caught their nauseating stench.
In a deep hollow underneath a cliff
Enclosed by trees and bristling shade, we set
Fresh tables and restored our altar fires.
From other lairs and corners of the sky—
A circling, screaming, taloned, snatching horde,
Spreading their dirty drool. I called my friends
To arms, to meet that fiendish breed in war.
Just as I ordered them, they stashed their swords
In grass clumps all around and hid their shields.
Now when the birds plunged, shrieking, down the shore’s arc,
Misenus gave the signal from his lookout
With his bronze horn. My men rushed in to maim
These hideous seabirds with their swords—strange battle.
No one was strong enough to strike a wound
Through those hard plumes. Stampeded to the sky,
They left half-­eaten loot and sickening slime.
Celaeno, though, ill-­omened prophet, perched
On a high cliff and shouted out these words:
‘Trojans, on top of slaughtering our cattle,

230–­The line is thought to be spurious.

220

225

230

235

240

245

239–­Misenus: A trumpeter; he reappears in book 6.

. 66 .

BOOK 3
You take up war against the blameless Harpies
And try to drive us from our rightful kingdom?
Store in your hearts the prophecy that Phoebus
Gave me. It came from the almighty father;
I, greatest of the Harpies, now reveal it.
You’ll call the wind to sail to Italy.
When you arrive, you’ll find an open harbor,
But walls will never ring your promised city
Until this crime against us and your hunger
Drive you to grind your tables in your jaws.’
She now took wing and fled into the woods.
My comrades’ blood froze. Overcome with fear,
They told me to abandon arms and plead
With prayers and promises to be let go,
Whether these things were gods or loathsome birds.
On the shore my father stretched his hands out, calling
High powers, and announcing their due rites.
‘Gods, block their threats! Hold this disaster back!
We serve you—save us!’ He had mooring ropes
Torn free, and sheets let out. Now the South Wind
Bellied the sails. Now on the foaming waves
We fled, winds and the pilot guiding us.
Wooded Zacynthus rose amid the waves,
Dulichium, Samē, Neritos’ steep rocks.
Ithaca’s crags passed by, where once Laertes
Was king; we cursed Ulysses’ motherland.
The misty peak of Leucata appeared—
Apollo’s shrine, which sailors hold in awe.
257–­
to grind your tables in your
jaws: Celaeno’s prophecy is fulfilled at
7.109–26.
269–­the pilot: Palinurus.
270–72–­Zacynthus . . . Dulichium,
Samē, Neritos . . . Ithaca: Greek islands
in the Ionian Sea. Samē is also known as
Samos.

250

255

260

265

270

275

272–73–­
Ithaca . . . Laertes . . .
Ulysses: Ulysses was the king of Ithaca;
Laertes was his father.
274–75–­Leucata . . . which sailors
hold in awe: A promontory with a
temple of Apollo constructed on a dangerous rock.

. 67 .

BOOK 3
We dropped our anchors at the little town,
Exhausted. All along the beach our ships stood.
Beyond hope, we had gained a place on dry land.
We cleansed ourselves for Jove, burned promised gifts,
Held Trojan ritual games on Actium’s shore.
My comrades stripped and wrestled in the old way,
Dripping with oil, relieved at their escape
Through all those cities of Greek enemies.
Meanwhile the sun passed through the great year’s circuit;
The waves grew sharp in icy winter’s North Winds.
The curved bronze shield great Abas’ arm once held
I nailed outside the gate above this verse:
‘Aeneas won these arms from conquering Greeks.’
My orders: man the oars and leave the harbor.
With zeal they lashed the sea and swept across it.
Quickly, Phaeacia’s cloud-­high bastion dipped
From sight. We traced Epirus’ shores and landed
At the Chaonian port of high Buthrotum.
“A rumor—unbelievable—possessed us:
Helenus, Priam’s son, reigned in the Greek towns,
Succeeding Pyrrhus; and Andromache
Had found in him her second Trojan husband!
280–­Actium’s shore: North of Leucata; location of the decisive naval battle
in 31 BCE through which Augustus (then
Octavian) secured power by defeating
Marc Antony and Cleopatra.
286–­Abas: One of Aeneas’ companions.
291–­Phaeacia: A legendary location
from Homer’s Odyssey, ruled by the benevolent King Alcinous.
292–­Epirus: A region in northwestern Greece.

280

285

290

295

293–­Chaonian . . . Buthrotum: Buthrotum is the Greek city ruled by the Trojan refugees Helenus and Andromache.
Helenus names part of it after his Trojan
friend Chaon.
295–97–­Helenus . . . Andromache
. . . second Trojan husband: Pyrrhus,
the son of Achilles, took Hector’s wife,
Andromache, as a slave after the sack of
Troy. According to Vergil, Pyrrhus gifted
her to another Trojan captive, Helenus.

. 68 .

BOOK 3
I was amazed and eager in my heart
To question him about these strange events.
My fleet was in the harbor; I went inland.
By chance Andromache was in the woods
Beside the river ‘Simoïs,’ offering
The ritual food and gifts to Hector’s ashes,
To call his spirit at the hollow green mound
And the two altars sacred to her tears.
She saw me coming in my Trojan armor
And froze, beside herself, stunned by the portent.
As she stood gazing, all warmth left her body.
She fainted. Finally, she could speak, and said,
‘Goddess’ son, is it you I see—alive?
You’re really here—with news? But if you’ve lost
The kind light, where is Hector?’ Now her tears gushed,
Her wailing filled that place; I was distressed,
And as she raved, I struggled with a few words:
‘I am alive, through all of my ordeals.
Don’t doubt your eyes.
Andromache, you were the wife of Hector.
How far you fell! But has some worthy fate
Now caught you? Or is Pyrrhus still your husband?’
She bent her head and whispered this to me:
‘Lucky beyond us all was Priam’s daughter,
Compelled to die beside a hostile grave
Beneath Troy’s high walls. No lots drawn for her,
No conqueror’s bed to take her prisoner!
Hauled past remote seas once my homeland burned,
I bore the insults of Achilles’ son.

302–­“Simoïs”: Helenus has named
the river after the one beside Troy, as he
has done with other place names.

300

305

310

315

320

325

321–­Priam’s daughter: Polyxena, sacrificed by the Greeks to the dead Achilles.

. 69 .

BOOK 3
I had a child in slavery. Pyrrhus, chasing
A Spartan bride, Hermione, Leda’s grandchild,
Gave me to Helenus, another slave.
Orestes, Fury-­hounded for his own crime,
And full of rage when Pyrrhus stole his bride,
Caught him and killed him at his father’s altar.
And at his death a portion of his kingdom
Passed rightfully to Helenus, who named
This land Chaonian, for Trojan Chaon,
And put a tower, ‘Ilium,’ on that ridge.
What wind, what fate has set your course, what god
Drove you here to our shores, without your knowing?
Your boy Ascanius still drinks the air?
He was at Troy with you—
And does he miss his mother, who is gone?
And do his father and his uncle Hector
Inspire him for his legacy of courage?’
She poured this out, with tears and useless wailing—
Then Priam’s son, heroic Helenus,
Came from the town, with plenty of attendants.
He knew us, and with joy he led us homeward,
And every word he spoke was bathed with tears.
Now I approached a little Troy, a tower

328–31–­
A Spartan bride . . . his
bride: These events are described in
Euripides’ tragedy Andromache: Pyrrhus
marries Hermione, daughter of the Spartan king Menelaus and Helen, daughter
of Leda. But Hermione was already betrothed to Orestes (see 4.471–73n), who
slays Pyrrhus at Delphi.
332–­at his father’s altar: An echo
of Pyrrhus’ killing of Priam at Troy at
2.550–55.

330

335

340

345

335– ­Chaon: A Trojan warrior, the
friend or brother of Helenus.
336–­“Ilium”: Another name for
Troy; see 302n.
339–­
Your boy Ascanius: Andromache is thinking of her young son
Astyanax, killed after the sack of Troy.
341–42–­his mother . . . uncle Hector:
Aeneas’ wife, Creusa, died at Troy.
Hector was her brother.

. 70 .

BOOK 3
Shaped like the great one, and a dry stream, ‘Xanthus.’
I kissed the threshold of a ‘Scaean Gate.’
My Trojans too enjoyed their kindred city.
The king in his broad vestibule received them,
And in his central hall they poured libations,
Holding the wine bowls. Food was set on gold plates.
“A day passed, then another. Breezes called
Our sails. The South Wind puffed to swell the canvas,
And I approached the prophet, questioning:
‘Trojan-­born voice of gods! To you are known
The power, the Clarian bay trees, and the tripod
Of Phoebus; stars and birdcalls, signs from birds’ flight:
Tell me (since all the rites have promised me
A good voyage, and the gods’ will urged me on
To make for Italy, so far away—
Except Celaeno spoke of some strange evil
To come, a fearful anger that would bring
A loathsome hunger), what are my chief dangers?
What can I do to overcome my trials?’
Helenus slaughtered sacramental heifers,
Begged the gods’ favor, freed his sacred head
Of wreaths and led me, cautious at the great
And holy presence, into Phoebus’ house,
And from his priestly mouth came this foretelling:
‘Son of the goddess, certainly gods guide you
Across the sea. The king of them allotted
350–­“Xanthus”: Named after a river
beside Troy.
351–­“Scaean Gate”: Named after the
landmark at Troy.
358–­the prophet: Helenus.
360–61–­the Clarian bay trees, and
the tripod of Phoebus: Bay (or laurel)

350

355

360

365

370

375

was sacred to Apollo. For the tripod, see
3.92n.
361–­
signs from birds’ flight: Au‑
gury, the study of the flight of birds to
determine the will of the gods.
375–­The king of them: Jupiter.

. 71 .

BOOK 3
This fate, this turning wheel of incident.
These words will help you cross the unknown seas
In safety, clear to an Italian haven.
Some things that I could say the Fates have hidden;
Some Juno, Saturn’s daughter, holds inside me.
First, you think Italy is close. In planning
To gain its harbors easily, you’re wrong.
The road that is no road runs by long shorelines.
In the Sicilian waves you’ll bend your oars
And cross the salty plain near Italy
By Circe’s island and the lakes of hell
Before a safe land lets you found a city.
Keep carefully in mind the signs I speak of:
Troubled at heart, you’ll find a huge sow lying
With thirty piglets by a distant river
Under the holm oaks. On her bed of dark ground
She will be white, white youngsters suckling her.
Your city will be there, and your sure respite.
And as for eating tables, calm your terror.
Follow fate’s path and ask Apollo’s help.
Avoid the nearer coast of Italy,
The beaches washed by tides we share, since evil

384–­Sicilian waves: Aeneas will sail
around the island of Sicily.
386–­Circe’s island: Aeaea, legendary
home of the sorceress Circe in the Odyssey. They will sail by her at 7.10.
386:–­the lakes of hell: Lake Avernus,
traditionally located at the entrance of
the Underworld. See 6.238 and 6.242n.
389–90–­
a huge sow lying with

380

385

390

395

thirty piglets: The prophecy is repeated
at 8.42–45 and fulfilled at 8.81–83.
392–­white: “White” (alba) refers to
Alba Longa, the city that will be founded
by Ascanius in Italy.
394– ­eating tables: Celaeno made
this prophecy at 3.247–57; see 3.257n.
396–­the nearer coast of Italy: That
is, the eastern coast, nearer Greece.

. 72 .

BOOK 3
Greeks live in every fort: the Locrians
Have built Narycium’s walls; Idomeneus
Of Lyctos occupies Sallentian flatlands;
Small Petelia can rely on walls built
By Philoctetes, Meliboea’s chieftain.
Once moored across the sea, when you are giving
Your promised gifts at newbuilt shoreline altars,
Hide your head, drape it in your purple clothing,
So that amid the flames of sacred rites
You see no enemy and spoil the omens.
Let your companions hold to this—and you too,
And your sons’ sons: keep pure in this observance.
The wind will take you on to Sicily;
Pelorus will disclose its narrow gap.
Aim for the left shore, circle in from far out;
Avoid the land and water on the right.
They say some cataclysm split these places.
(Time holds within it such tremendous changes.)
It was a single place once, but the waves
Burst through the middle, splitting Italy
From Sicily, to sever farms and cities
By the new shores and narrow, sweeping tides.
Scylla lurks on the right, vicious Charybdis
On the left; its vortex sucks down vast cascades
Sheer to the bottom three times every day
And spouts them back to strike the stars with froth.
Scylla, down in her secret, murky cave,
398–402–­the Locrians . . . chieftain:
Various Greek enemies from the Trojan War. The Locrians were the troops
of Ajax the Lesser; on Idomeneus, see
3.121n. The Greek warrior Philoctetes
was stranded by the Greeks because of
the rotten smell of his wound.
405–­Hide your head: A forerunner

400

405

410

415

420

of the Roman custom of covering one’s
head when conducting a sacrifice.
411–­Pelorus:–­The northeastern tip
of Sicily.
420–­Scylla . . . Charybdis: Dangers
on either side of the Strait of Messina
encountered by Odysseus (Ulysses) in
Odyssey 12. See 1.200–201n.

. 73 .

BOOK 3
Thrusts out her mouths, drags vessels onto rocks.
She’s human—she’s a girl with lovely breasts
Above the waist, below a gruesome sea beast;
Wolves at her belly end in dolphin tails.
Better to double back and make your slow way
Around Pachynum, Sicily’s far headland,
Than glimpse disgusting Scylla in her huge lair
And hear her sea-­blue dogs make boulders echo.
And if I can be trusted as a prophet,
And know my art, and if the god inspires me,
Then above all hear this, child of the goddess,
An urgency I can’t repeat enough:
Plead with and pray to mighty Juno’s godhead;
Win the queen over with your suppliant gifts
And cheerful promises: at last she’ll let you
Leave Sicily for Italy—your triumph.
When you reach Cumae, near the sacred lakes
And the deep-­sighing forest of Avernus,
You’ll see the raving Sibyl in a deep cave.
She chants the future, and with special signs
Marks it on leaves. The virgin puts these verses
In sequence and then locks them in her cave.
They stay there motionless, in perfect order.
But when a hinge turns, and a tender breeze
Falls on that flimsy foliage and disturbs it,
She doesn’t chase its flutters through her cavern,
Or link the lines back in their proper order.
430–­Pachynum: A promontory on
the southeastern side of Sicily. Helenus
suggests that Aeneas go around Sicily
rather than risk encountering Scylla and
Charybdis in the Strait of Messina.
438–­Win the queen over: Juno remains hostile to Aeneas until the end of
book 12.

425

430

435

440

445

450

441–43–­Cumae . . . Avernus . . .
Sibyl: Near modern Naples, Cumae was
the home of Apollo’s prophetess Sibyl,
who wrote her prophecies on oak leaves.
These events will be described in book 6.

. 74 .

BOOK 3
Disgusted, people leave, forgoing counsel.
You must not brood about the time you spend there,
Though your friends grumble, though your goal insists
On canvas bellying across the deep.
Approach the seer, beg to know your future
From her own chanting mouth, by her goodwill:
She’ll tell of tribes that live there, wars to come,
And hardships to endure or to avoid.
Revere her, and she’ll grant a good voyage back.
But this is all that I’m allowed to tell you.
Go then, raise Troy to heaven with your strivings.’
After the augur spoke these loving words,
He had the gifts, heavy with their carved ivory
And gold, brought to our ships. He packed our hulls
With silver bars and cauldrons from Dodona.
A corselet, triple-­layered in gold chain mail,
And splendid helmet, topped with flowing plumes,
Had once been Pyrrhus’; and my father got
Special gifts. Pilots, horses were provided,
Fresh rowers, and new armor for my comrades.
Meanwhile, Anchises had the sails refitted—
Nothing must keep us when the wind was right.
Helenus spoke to him with great respect:
‘Anchises, fit to marry lofty Venus,
Troy fell twice, twice the gods who love you saved you.
There is your western land. Spread sails and seize it.
Take care, though: skirt the near side, since the far side
Alone is opened for you by Apollo.
Go now! You’re blessed with this devoted son.

466–­Dodona: The oldest oracle of
Zeus (Jupiter), located in Epirus, near
Buthrotum, in northwestern Greece.
476–­
Troy fell twice: Hercules had
sacked Troy before the Trojan War, after

455

460

465

470

475

480

the Trojan king Laomedon refused to
compensate him as promised for killing
a sea monster plaguing the city.
480–­this devoted son: Another reference to Aeneas’ pietas.

. 75 .

BOOK 3
I mustn’t waste the rising South Wind’s time.’
Andromache, as gracious as her husband,
Heaped on more gifts, in grief at our departure:
Clothing she had embroidered with gold yarn,
And for Ascanius a Trojan cloak.
‘Take what my hands worked and remember me.
Andromache, the wife of Hector, pledges
Her love this way. Receive your family’s last gifts—
You, the sole image of Astyanax
Left to me, with his hands and his expressions
And eyes; he’d be at boyhood’s end, like you.’
As I was leaving, tears rose in my eyes:
‘Be happy, since your destiny is finished.
We are called on to one and then another.
You have your peace: no ocean field to plow,
No land to seek that falls away from you
Forever. You’ve made images of Xanthus
And Troy with your own hands—with better omens,
I hope, than Troy, and out of reach of Greeks.
And if I ever come to Tiber’s country
And see the ramparts granted to my people,
Italy and Epirus at its border—
Which share a history, and a founder too,
Dardanus—will unite in heart. We’ll make
A single Troy. Our heirs must see to this.’
“We sailed out. Circling the Ceraunian headland
Gave us the quickest voyage to Italy.
The sun plunged down. The mountains shadowed over.
On the dry beach—warm, yearned-­for earth—we drew
Lots for the next day’s rowing, then dispersed,
500–­Tiber’s country: Italy.
502–­Epirus: See 3.292n.

485

490

495

500

505

510

506–­the Ceraunian headland: The
Ceraunians are a coastal mountain range
in Albania, north of Greece.

. 76 .

BOOK 3
Sprawled, rested. Fresh sleep poured through tired limbs.
The Hours had not yet driven Night halfway
Around, when zealous Palinurus rose,
Ears sifting air to test for any wind.
He traced the still sky’s gliding constellations:
The Rainy Ones, the Oxen and the Great Bear,
And in the south, Orion with gold armor.
Seeing the proper signs in limpid heaven,
He blared a signal from the stern. We broke camp
And spread our wings of sails and ventured out.
Now blushing Dawn had chased the stars away;
We glimpsed dim hills—there, just above the sea,
Was Italy. Achates gave the first shout,
Then the whole company cheered: ‘Italy!’
Father Anchises wreathed a giant bowl,
Filled it with wine, and on the looming stern
Stood calling on the gods:
‘Deities who rule land and sea and storms,
Be gracious, send a wind, make our way easy.’
The breezes strengthened, and a harbor opened;
Then on the heights we saw Minerva’s shrine.
They furled the sails and turned the prows toward shore.
Waves from the east have made a bow-­shaped harbor.
In front sharp rocks are sprayed with briny water.
On either side stone spires with their low arms
Form twin walls, and the shrine is safely inland.
Four snow-­white horses, our first omen seen,
Ranged browsing on the plain. My father spoke:
‘New land, you’ll bring us war, since horses go

516–17–­The Rainy Ones, the Oxen
. . . the Great Bear . . . Orion: The constellations the Pleiades, Boötes, and Ursa
Major (Big Dipper or Plow); the scene is
modeled on Odyssey 5.

515

520

525

530

535

531–­Minerva’s shrine: Castrum Mi‑
nervae, in Calabria, Italy.

. 77 .

BOOK 3
To war in armor—these beasts threaten war.
They can submit, though, and be trained to draw
A chariot beneath a yoke of concord;
So peace may come.’ Cheering, we disembarked.
We called on Pallas first, shield-­clanging godhead.
Trojan clothes hooded us before her altars.
As Helenus had urged this most of all,
We honored Argive Juno, offering
Gifts in the flames. Our vows fulfilled, we hurried
To point the sail-­draped yardarms out to sea.
This was a land of Greeks, which made us leery.
Tarentum’s gulf!—where Hercules (the tale says)
Visited. Facing it rose Juno’s temple,
Caulon’s fort, and ship-­wrecking Scylaceum.
Above the far flood rose Sicilian Etna.
We heard the sea-­struck rocks in their vast groaning
Already, and the shattered voice of breakers.
The shallows leapt, the sand ran through their seething.
My father shouted, ‘That must be Charybdis—
Helenus warned us of those crags and grim rocks.
Friends, save us! All together at the oars!’
The men obeyed, and Palinurus led,
Wrenching his creaking prow out toward the sea.
The whole fleet rowed and turned their sails to follow.
The arching billow heaved up to the sky,
Then hollowed out: we sank as deep as hell.
Three times the caverns at the cliff ’s base thundered.
Three times the foam shot out and soaked the stars.
Sun and wind left us now. Exhausted, lost,

544–­Pallas: Minerva.
547–­Argive Juno: Juno was the
patron goddess of Argos, a city in Greece.
551–­Tarentum’s gulf . . . Hercules:
Tarentum, located in the arch of the

540

545

550

555

560

565

“boot” of Italy, was said to have been
founded by Hercules.
552–54–­Juno’s temple, Caulon’s fort
. . . Scylaceum . . . Etna: Locales on the
eastern coast of Sicily.

. 78 .

BOOK 3
We drifted to a coast, to Cyclops country.
The harbor, blocked from wind, is broad and peaceful,
But Etna’s gales of rubble roar beside it.
Sometimes a dark cloud blasts clear up to heaven,
A pitch-­black smoky whirlwind ringed with white ash:
Its swarms of hurtling fire flick the stars.
Sometimes it vomits crags and mountain entrails
Into the air, or masses melted stone
From its deep roots and, with a groan, boils over.
The Giant, lightning-­scorched Enceladus,
They say, is pinned beneath enormous Etna,
Which breathes its fires out of shattered forges,
And when he turns, exhausted, all the island
Trembles and roars, and thick smoke masks the sky.
Cowering all night in the woods, we suffered
Inhuman horrors, noises out of nowhere.
Neither the stars’ flames nor the moon were showing.
The heights of heaven lost all incandescence;
The hours of night were buried in dark cloud.
The day was rising, and the dawn appeared.
“Aurora drove the shadows from the damp sky
When a strange form burst on us from the forest:
A pitiful, starved heap of dirt and rags.
A suppliant, his hands out, he approached.
We stared. His long beard straggled, he was filthy,
Thorns pinned his clothes. But he was Greek, we saw:
A past invader, in his country’s armor.
He’d seen our Trojan clothes and arms already
And halted for a little while in terror—

569– ­Cyclops country: The region
around Mount Etna.
578–­Enceladus: One of the Giants,
who rebelled against the Olympians and

570

575

580

585

590

595

were punished by being chained under
mountains (here, the volcano Mount
Etna).
589–­Aurora: The dawn goddess.

. 79 .

BOOK 3
Then he came rushing forward to the shore,
Weeping and pleading: ‘By the stars, the gods,
This sky that gives us shining air to breathe,
Take me on board, to any country, Trojans.
That is enough. I sailed in that Greek fleet,
And I attacked your homes—yes, I admit it.
If my crime is too great, then scatter me
Across the waves and sink me in the vast deep.
Give me the joy of death at human hands!’
He clutched my knees, in an unyielding grovel.
I strove to draw from him his name and lineage,
And then the story of his misery.
Anchises quickly gave the youth his right hand,
A ready sign of friendship, lending courage.
At last he let his terror go and spoke:
‘I’m Achaemenides. Luckless Ulysses
Took me to Troy: my father, Adamastus,
Was poor—I wish I’d stayed in poverty.
My friends forgot me in their fear and left me
In the Cyclops’ monstrous cavern when they stole
Out of his savage door. That huge, dark house
Is fouled with gory food. He towers, striking
The stars. Gods, rid the world of such a plague!
Who’d want to speak to him or look at him?
He eats poor human entrails and black blood.
In the middle of his cave I saw him lying:
He put his giant hand on two of us
And smashed them on a rock; the cavern’s entrance
Ran with sprayed blood. I saw him chewing bodies

613–­Achaemenides: Not mentioned
in previous literature and probably an
invention of Vergil.

600

605

610

615

620

625

617–­the Cyclops’ monstrous cavern:
A reference to Odyssey 9, in which Odysseus (Ulysses) and his men encounter
the Cyclops Polyphemus.

. 80 .

BOOK 3
Black with their own gore, while their limbs still quivered.
He paid. Ulysses acted like the hero
He was, and took a great, defiant risk.
The Cyclops, stuffed with food and sunk in wine,
Stretched his great length across the cave and laid down
His lolling head, and slept, and vomited
Blood, wine, and gory fragments. We beseeched
The holy powers, drew lots for tasks, and swarmed
Around him. With a sharpened spike we pierced
The single eye beneath his brutal brow—
Sun-­big, big as a shield an Argive carries.
The joy, when we avenged our comrades’ ghosts!
But run, poor people! Slash your mooring cables!
Get away!
As huge as Polyphemus in his cave,
Shutting his woolly herds in pens for milking,
A hundred Cyclopes are on the loose
On this curved shore and wander in these mountains.
And now the third moon fills its horns with light,
Tally of time endured deep in these woods
Among beasts’ dens. From cliffs I see the monsters.
I tremble when I hear their steps and voices.
Trees give me miserable fodder: berries,
And stony cornels, and I pull at roots.
Yours are the first ships I have known to land here
In all my watching—and at any price,
I submit, to escape this evil race.
Grant any death you like, and take my spirit.’
Just as he finished, we saw Polyphemus
Himself, high on a hill among his herd,
His great bulk moving toward the shore he knew—
A massive, hideous monster, though now blinded.
A pine log led his hand and braced his steps.
The woolly ewes, his sole delight and comfort,
Followed him.

. 81 .

630

635

640

645

650

655

660

BOOK 3
He waded to the deep and level water
To wash the scooped-­out socket’s running matter,
Grinding his teeth and groaning. Now he strode
Far out, but no waves wet his towering flanks.
Away we scrambled with the suppliant,
Poor man. With stealth, we cut the ropes and rowed
Flat out, churning the surface frantically.
He wrenched his footsteps toward the sound we made,
But couldn’t get his grasping hands on us—
We were too fast on the Ionian currents.
His roar shook every wave on that wide sea;
Inland, through Italy it sent its terror,
And bellowed in the arching caves of Etna.
All of the Cyclops tribe, roused by the noise,
Ran from the woods and hills to fill the beach.
We saw the clan of Etna standing there,
Each with a cloud-­high head and one wild eye—
Grim council—like the oaks that fill the ether,
Or cone-­hung cypresses; like mountain forests
Of Jove, like groves in which Diana hunts.
Our terror drove us headlong—anywhere.
We let the sails out for the wind to take.
Helenus warned us of the narrow way
By Scylla and Charybdis: death crowds both sides.
We chose to set the canvas for retreat.
A north wind from Pelorus’ narrow cape
Drove us around Pantagia’s rocky gates—
The bay of Megara—low-­lying Thapsus.
671–­Ionian: The Ionian Sea is the
stretch of water between Italy and
Greece.
681–­Diana: The goddess of hunting.
688–89–­
Pantagia’s . . . Thap­
sus: Aeneas’ most direct route would
be through the Strait of Messina (see

665

670

675

680

685

3.420n, 3.430n), but he avoids it because
of the dangers posed by Scylla and Charybdis. Instead, he sails around Sicily,
passing a number of Sicilian locales
along the way, including the mouth of
the river Pantagia.

. 82 .

BOOK 3
Hapless Ulysses’ Achaemenides
Pointed out shores he’d skimmed in coming there.
Wave-­washed Plemyrium confronts an island
Stretched across a Sicilian bay. The ancients
Called it Ortygia, land of Arethusa,
The spring to which the Alpheus River tunneled
From Elis, as they say, to blend in this sea.
We prayed to local gods, as we’d been told to,
And sailed on past Helorus’ fertile wetlands,
And grazed the jutting, high Pachynian cliffs.
Far off rose Camerina—fate forbade
Moving it—and the fields outlying Gela,
A city named for roaring Laughter River;
Steep Acragas then showed huge walls far off—
Once, long ago, it bred high-­hearted horses.
We passed palm-­filled Selinus with a fair wind
And picked through Lilybaeum’s vicious shallows
And found a port, and grief, at Drepanum.
There I lost my consoler for each mishap
And care, Anchises, whom so many storms
Had hounded. Best of fathers, you were worn out
And left me, after all I saved you from.
From all dire things foretold by Helenus
And grim Celaeno, this one grief was missing,

694–96–­Ortygia . . . Arethusa . . .
Elis: The Sicilian spring Arethusa was
said to originate in the Peloponnese. According to myth the nymph Arethusa,
pursued by the river god Alpheus, fled
under the sea to Sicily. Alpheus followed
and their waters merged at Ortygia, near
Syracuse.

690

695

700

705

710

699–707–­
Pachynian cliffs . . .
Drepanum: Starting from Cape Pachynus, the southeastern tip of Sicily, Aeneas
sails along the southern coast and up the
western side to the port of Drepanum,
the northwestern corner of the island.
He is ready to turn in toward Italy when
Juno’s storm sends him southwest to
Carthage on the African coast.

. 83 .

BOOK 3
And this I suffered last in my long travels.
It was from there god brought me to your shore.”
So, with the crowd engrossed, Father Aeneas
Told of the fate the gods sent, and his travels.
At last he reached the end and sat in silence.

715–­to your shore: Vergil returns the
frame to Dido and the Carthaginians.

. 84 .

715

BOOK 4

Now the queen’s lifeblood fed her brutal love wound;
A flame, unseen, gnawed at her hour by hour.
His martial manhood and his family’s glory
Came back to her—his face, his words now clung to
Her heart; her body had no peace or rest.
Dawn had raised Phoebus’ torch to light the earth,
And pushed the drizzling shadows from the sky,
When stricken Dido told her loving sister:
“Anna, half-­waking dreams have terrified me.
This stranger who has come here as our guest—
His face, his walk, his heart’s and weapons’ strength—
I think—it must be true—this is a god’s child.
Fear marks plebeian spirits. How I pity
His hard fate and the long, grim war he told of!
If ever my heart moved from where I fixed it—
I set myself against the ties of marriage
When death had cheated me of my first love,
Blighting for me the wedding torch and chamber—
I might relent, this single time, and falter.
Anna, I must confess, since poor Sychaeus
Fell, since my brother stained our home with murder,
This one alone has moved me; now I waver.
I recognize the remnants of that flame.
6–­Phoebus’ torch: The sun; Phoebus
is Apollo, the sun god.
10–­stranger . . . guest: The Greeks
and Romans believed in treating
strangers as honored guests.

5

10

15

20

17–­my first love: Dido’s dead husband, Sychaeus.
21–­my brother . . . murder: Pygmalion, king of Tyre and Dido’s brother,
had Sychaeus killed. See Venus’ narrative
at 1.338–68.

. 85 .

BOOK 4
But let the earth first gape to its foundation,
Or the almighty father’s lightning drive me
To the pale shades of Erebus and deep night,
Before I wrong you, Honor, and your laws.
The man who first was part of me has taken
My love. He ought to keep it where he’s buried.”
Her overflowing tears now soaked her dress.
Anna replied, “You, who are more than life
To me, mean to let grief devour your youth,
Without sweet children and the gifts of Venus?
You think that ashes care, or ghosts in graveyards?
Both here in Libya and back in Tyre
No suitors tamed your grief. Iarbas and others
Reared by this rich, triumphant Africa
Are scorned—and now you fight a love that suits you?
Recall whose land this is you’ve made your home in:
The cities of Gaetulians, never conquered,
The wild Numidians, treacherous Syrtis,
Bare desert, and marauding Barcaeans
Encircle you, and conflict looms from Tyre—
Your brother threatens.
It was the provident gods and Juno’s favor
That steered the Trojan ships here on the wind.
The city that you’ll see, the rising empire
Out of this marriage! Trojan allied arms
Will bring this Punic town to soaring glory.

33–­the gifts of Venus: Sex.
35–­Libya: Here, Africa is meant.
35–­Tyre: Dido’s hometown in Phoenicia (modern Lebanon) which she fled
after the murder of her husband.
36–­Iarbas: Dido’s most determined
suitor; king of the Gaetulians and son of
the African god Ammon (Jupiter’s African counterpart). See 4.196–219.

25

30

35

40

45

40–41–­Gaetulians . . . Numidians:
Peoples of northern Africa.
41–­Syrtis: Dangerous sandbanks in
the modern Gulf of Sirte.
42–­Barcaeans: Barce was a city close
to modern-­day Tripoli. Vergil may mention it here for its resemblance to Hannibal’s family name, Barca. See 4.386n.
49–­Punic: Carthaginian.

. 86 .

BOOK 4
Seek the gods’ sanction with propitious gifts.
Weave pretexts for delaying as you fete him:
Seas raging through the days of wet Orion,
Ships damaged, and a hard and stubborn sky.”
This appeal made the spark of passion blaze,
Lent hope to hesitation, melted shame.
First they approached each temple and its altar
With ritual pleas, killed chosen sheep for Phoebus,
Law-­giving Ceres, the Lyaean Father,
But Juno first, who joins the bonds of marriage.
Radiant Dido held the bowl, her right hand
Tipping it on a snow-­white heifer’s forehead.
She strode beneath gods’ eyes to wealthy altars,
Began each day with gifts, searched for the meaning
Cut open in the steaming guts of beasts.
O empty-­minded augurs! In her madness,
What use were prayers and temples? Flame devoured
Soft marrow, and a heart’s wound throbbed in hiding.
Poor Dido burned, raved, wandered through the city,
As when a deer, at peace in Cretan glades,
Is pierced from far off by a hunting shepherd.
Not knowing where the flying iron point
Landed, he leaves it. Through the groves of Dicte
She runs at random, in her side the death reed.
Now Dido leads Aeneas through the fortress,
Shows him Sidonian wealth, the rising city,
Begins to speak but leaves her words half-­said.
At fall of daylight, she repeats her banquet,

52–­Orion: The setting of the constellation Orion in November was linked to
stormy weather.
58–­the Lyaean Father: Bacchus, here
called “The Looser” as the god of wine
and revelry.

50

55

60

65

70

75

72–­Dicte: A mountain in Crete.
75–­Sidonian: Carthaginian; Sidon
was a city in Phoenicia.

. 87 .

BOOK 4
Demands to hear the Trojans’ trials again,
Again hangs on his words in her delusion.
Her guests are gone, the moon puts out its dim light,
And falling constellations counsel sleep;
She sorrows in the empty house, reclining
There on the couch he left—sees, hears his absence.
She holds Ascanius—so like his father!—
In her lap, cheats her real and shameful love.
The towers she began don’t rise. The young men
No longer drill or build defending ramparts
Or ports. The work stalls, halfway done—the menace
Of high walls, and the cranes as high as heaven.
So sickness gripped the queen, who let her folly
Outrun her good name. Juno, Jove’s dear wife
And Saturn’s daughter, saw, and went to Venus.
“Truly, your son and you have won such glory,
Such huge spoils. Power worth eternal praise
Shows in two gods who dupe a mortal woman!
I know that you’ve been wary of our walls here,
Distrustful when you saw high Carthage settled.
Where will this end? Where is this fierce fight going?
Why not a lasting treaty and a contract
Of marriage? What your heart desired, you have.
Dido’s love burns. Her bones draw in its fury.
Why not unite two races? We can rule them
Together. As a Phrygian husband’s slave,
She’ll hand you all these Tyrians, her dowry.”
But Venus felt the trick in this, the effort
To steer Italian power to Libya.
She countered: “To agree is merely sane.
Who would prefer to take up arms against you?
If only what you plan succeeds in practice . . .
103–­Phrygian: Here, Trojan; Juno
refers to Aeneas.

. 88 .

80

85

90

95

100

105

BOOK 4
Fate, to me, sways, uncertain. Is Jove’s plan
One town for Tyrians and Trojan exiles?
Alliance or a blended population?
You, as his wife, could rightly probe his thinking.
Ask him, and I’ll be with you.” Juno answered,
“Leave that to me. For now, I’ll tell you briefly—
So listen—how we finish what’s at hand.
Poor Dido and Aeneas are preparing
A woodland hunting trip at dawn tomorrow,
When the sun’s rising rays reveal the round earth.
While horsemen rush to cordon off the passes,
I’ll mingle dusky cloud with hail and rain
And pour it down and shake the sky with thunder.
Their retinue will scatter in the dark.
The same cave will receive the Trojan leader
And Dido. I’ll be there (with your approval);
Join her to him, make her his own in marriage
That’s sanctioned. These will be the rites.” Then Venus,
Amused at the duplicity, agreed.
Dawn rose now, leaving Ocean; and the gates,
In her fresh rays, emitted chosen troops,
With nets and traps and broad-­tipped hunting spears.
Massylian horsemen, keen-­nosed dogs ran forward.
At the queen’s door the Tyrian leaders waited.
Her horse stood radiant in gold and purple,
And fiercely stamped, and gnawed a foaming bit.
At last, thronged with her retinue, she came.
Her cloak was Punic, edged with lavish stitching.
Her hair was clasped in gold, her quiver gold,
A brooch of gold secured her purple robe.
The Trojan troops and an excited Iulus
126–­in marriage: Juno is the goddess
of marriage.

110

115

120

125

130

135

140

132–­Massylian: Refers to a people of
northern Africa.

. 89 .

BOOK 4
Came up. Finest of all these was Aeneas,
Who as her escort joined his ranks with hers.
Apollo, coming to his mother’s Delos
From winter Lycia and the river Xanthus,
Renews the dance. Around the altar shout
Dryopians, Cretans, tattooed Agathyrsi.
He walks the slope of Cynthus with his long hair
Braided and bound with tender leaves and gold.
Arrows clank on his shoulder. Just as lively,
As beautiful, as noble, rode Aeneas.
They came into the hills and trackless woods.
Wild goats they started from a stony summit
Ran down the slope. Deer from another refuge
Sped off in crowding ranks across the bare plain,
In dusty panic to escape the mountain.
The boy Ascanius, keen-­horsed keen rider,
Outraced each troop of hunters through the valley
And scorned the tame herds—better that the heights
Disgorge foam-­spitting boars or tawny lions!
From the sky now a racket and a tumult
Erupted; storm clouds shot in, full of hail.
Trojan youth, Punic escorts, Venus’ grandson
From Dardanus’ realm scattered through the fields
Toward urgent shelter. From the hillsides, streams rushed.
The Trojan lord and Dido found the same cave.
Primeval Earth and Juno, bride-­bestower,
Signaled, and in collusion, lightning flashed
At the union. On the mountaintops nymphs howled.
From this day came catastrophe and death.

143–­Delos: The island in the Aegean
Sea where Apollo and his twin sister,
Diana, were born.
144–­Lycia: In Anatolia, modern Turkey.

145

150

155

160

165

146–­
Dryopians . . . Agathyrsi:
Somewhat obscure Greek tribes.
147–­Cynthus: A mountain on Delos.
166–­Primeval Earth: A Roman goddess.

. 90 .

BOOK 4
No thought of public scandal or of hiding
Her passion troubled Dido any longer.
She called it marriage, covering her own fault.
Rumor, the swiftest plague there is, went straight
To all the settlements of Libya.
She thrives on motion, drawing strength from travel;
Tiny and timid first, then shooting upward,
She hides her head in clouds yet walks the ground.
They say the Earth, in anger at the gods,
Bore this child last, quick-­footed, quick-­winged sister
Of Titan Enceladus and huge Coeus.
Beneath each feather of the ghastly monster—
This is the startling legend—is a wide eye,
A tongue, a blaring mouth, a pricked-­up ear.
Between the earth and sky, in shadow, shrieking,
She flies at night. No sweet sleep shuts her eyes.
By day she sits as lookout on a rooftop
Or a high tower and alarms great cities.
Her claws hold both true news and evil lies.
She filled the realms now with her tangled talk,
Chanting in glee a mix of fact and fiction:
“Aeneas, from a Trojan family, came here.
Beautiful Dido chose him as her lover.
What kind of rulers spend the whole long winter
Sunk deep in sensuous and sordid passion?”
The ugly goddess passed along these stories
At large, then flew directly to King Iarbas,
173–­Rumor: Latin Fama, a deity.
178–80–­the Earth . . . huge Coeus:
The Olympian gods came to power
by staging a coup against the previous
generation, the Titans. The Earth goddess Gaia, their mother, took revenge by
birthing the chaos-­spreader Rumor.

170

175

180

185

190

195

193–94–­What kind of rulers . . . sor­
did passion?: Vergil’s language probably
evoked images of Antony and Cleopatra
for his contemporary audience.
196–­Iarbas: See 4.36n.

. 91 .

BOOK 4
And with her words piled high and lit his rage.
A Garamantian nymph and Ammon’s violence
Created him. His broad lands raised to Jove
A hundred huge shrines. Priests and altar flames
Kept constant vigils for the gods, while herds’ blood
Slathered the floor and bright wreaths decked the doorways.
Stung with this hearsay now, in frantic rage,
He faced the living gods before their altars,
Raised suppliant hands and prayed insistently,
“Almighty Jove, to whom the race of Moors
On their embroidered couches pour libations—
Here, have you seen? When you hurl thunder, Father,
Is terror needless? Is that fire, that noise
Up in the clouds without an aim or meaning?
A woman straying on my borders rented
A scrap of shore for building on and farming
On my conditions. She refused me marriage
But lets Aeneas rule with her—no, rule her.
That Paris with his mincing retinue,
An Asian headdress on his perfumed hair,
Masters his loot. I guess it’s empty legend
Alone that makes us fill your shrines with gifts?”
This was the king’s prayer as he grasped the altar;
And the almighty heard, and turned to see
The queen’s walls and the heedless, shameless lovers.
He spoke to Mercury and gave this order:
“Call the West Winds, my son, glide on your wings;
Speak to the Trojan leader loitering
At Tyrian Carthage with no thought for cities

198–­Ammon: An African deity identified with Jupiter.
206–­Moors: The people of Mauretania in northwest Africa.
215–­
That Paris with his mincing

200

205

210

215

220

225

retinue: Iarbas disparages Aeneas by
linking him with his fellow Trojan Paris,
first as a wife stealer, and second as effeminate, a charge typical of Roman
prejudice toward Easterners.

. 92 .

BOOK 4
Granted by fate. Go, hurry my words landward.
This wasn’t what his lovely mother promised,
Or why, both times, she saved him from the Greeks,
But to rule Italy, beget an empire
That roars with war, to give us noble Teucer’s
Descendants, who will bring the whole world laws.
If this majestic future cannot rouse him
To take this labor on for his own glory,
Does he begrudge his son the Roman fortress?
What can he gain here in a hostile nation?
Ausonian progeny? Lavinian fields?
The sum of what I want him told: Set sail!”
He spoke. So on his mighty father’s orders,
The son prepared, first tying golden sandals
Onto his feet, to take him swift as wind
High over land and ocean on their wings.
He took the wand that calls pale souls from Orcus,
Sends them to gloomy Tartarus, awakens
And puts to sleep, and opens perished eyes.
With this he drove the winds and skimmed through chaos
Of clouds. He saw the brow and looming flanks
Of rocky Atlas, prop of the high heavens—
Atlas, with black clouds always at his head,
Where the pines grow, and wind and rain blast hard.
The snow spreads down his shoulders. Off the chin
Of the old man torrents pour. Ice locks his sharp beard.
Mercury halted, poised on balanced wings,
228–­she saved him from the Greeks:
Venus first spirited Aeneas away from a
deadly battle with Diomedes (Iliad 5);
she then directed him out of Troy as it
fell (see 2.589–92).
236–­Ausonian: Italian.
242–43–­Orcus . . . Tartarus: Under-

230

235

240

245

250

world locations. Mercury is a guide of
souls, or psychopomp, tasked with leading the dead to and from the Underworld
with his wand.
247–­Atlas: Mercury’s grandfather;
the Titan condemned to hold the sky on
his shoulders.

. 93 .

BOOK 4
Then hurled his body headlong toward the waves.
A certain kind of bird skims shoreline waters
Or rounds the base of crags where fish are teeming.
Like this, Cyllene’s native sliced the winds,
Leaving his mother’s father, passed to earth,
To Libya’s sandy shoreline, where he landed.
He set his feathered feet among the shanties
And saw Aeneas laying out the towers
And building houses. Tawny jasper flecked
His sword. His shoulders trailed a purple cloak,
Glowingly rich, with thin gold stripes, a present
Woven by wealthy Dido. The god scolded:
“Your wife must like you laying the foundations
For lofty Carthage, such a splendid city—
Forgetting your own kingdom that awaits you.
The ruler of the gods, whose strength bends heaven
And earth, has sent me down from bright Olympus,
Commanding that I fly here with this message:
What will this loitering in Libya bring you?
If you’re unmoved by all the coming splendor,
Which is a weight you do not wish to shoulder,
Think of your hopes as Iulus grows, your heir,
Owed an Italian realm and Roman soil.”
These were the words from the Cyllenian’s mouth.
Still speaking, he passed out of human vision
And trailed away until the thin air hid him.
This apparition left Aeneas stunned.
His hair stood up, and words stuck in his throat.

254–­A certain kind of bird: Probably a gull; the simile echoes Odyssey 5,
in which Mercury, sent by Jupiter, orders
Odysseus (Ulysses) to leave his lover
Calypso and continue his journey home.
256–­Cyllene’s native: Maia, a daugh-

255

260

265

270

275

280

ter of Atlas, bore Mercury on Mount Cyllene in southern Greece.
261–­Tawny jasper: The jewels are on
the hilt or the scabbard.
273–­The line is thought to be spurious.

. 94 .

BOOK 4
He burned to run, however sweet this land was.
The gods’ august command had terrified him.
But how? What would he dare to tell the queen—
So passionate? How could he start explaining?
His mind kept darting and his thoughts dividing
Through the whole matter and each baffling question.
After much wavering, this seemed the best plan:
He called Mnestheus and brave Serestus
And Sergestus: they must get the men together
Quietly, rig the fleet, and hide the reason
Things stirred. And meanwhile Dido, the good lady,
Would not expect such vital love could fail.
He would approach her at the kindest time
And seek the best words. With alacrity,
These men obeyed in everything he ordered.
But who can fool a lover? Soon the queen—
Anxious when nothing threatened—sensed the trick,
Though no ship moved yet. Evil Rumor told her
The fleet was being fitted for a journey.
She raved all through the town in helpless passion,
Like a bacchant customary mysteries rouse
With ritual ululations, brandished emblems,
And shouts that summon her to dark Cithaeron.
She faced off with Aeneas and accused him:
“You traitor, did you think that you could hide
Such a great crime, that you could sneak away?
The pledge you made, our passion for each other,
Even your Dido’s brutal death won’t keep you?
Monster, you toil beneath these winter skies
And rush to cross the deep through northern blasts—
For a strange home on someone else’s land?
301–­bacchant: a female follower of
Bacchus.
303– ­Cithaeron: Mountain near

285

290

295

300

305

310

Thebes, sacred to Bacchus and hence the
location of bacchic rituals performed by
the bacchantes.

. 95 .

BOOK 4
If ancient Troy still stood today to sail to,
Would you make off across that surging plain?
You run from me? By your pledged hand, my tears
(Since everything but these is stripped from me),
Our union, and the wedding we embarked on—
If I have ever earned it through my kindness,
Have pity on my tottering house and me.
If pleading has a chance still, change your mind.
The Libyan clans and Nomad rulers hate me,
So do the Tyrians, because of you.
You ruined me and my good name—my one path
To the stars. Tell me, my guest (the sole term left—
Not spouse): Whose hands will kill what you abandon?
My prospect? Will Pygmalion raze my walls?
Gaetulian Iarbas lead me off, a captive?
If only I’d conceived before you bolted,
And had your offspring, if a small Aeneas
Played in my palace, with a face like yours—
I wouldn’t feel so cheated and abandoned.”
She spoke; he kept his eyes down, at Jove’s orders,
Struggling to force his feelings from his heart.
Finally, briefly: “Name your favors, list them.
There isn’t one I ever would deny.
Never will I regret Elissa’s memory
While I have memory, while I breathe and move.
A little on the facts, though: don’t imagine
I meant to sneak away; and as for spouse,
I never made a pact of marriage with you.
If fate would let me live the life I chose,

320–­
Libyan clans and Nomad
rulers: Dido refers to the local tribes in
North Africa in whose territory her city
of Carthage was being built.
325–­Pygmalion: see 4.21n.

315

320

325

330

335

340

335–­Elissa: An alternate name for
Dido.
339–­I never made: Aeneas’ interpretation of what happened in the cave differs from Dido’s (4.172).

. 96 .

BOOK 4
If I had power over my decisions,
I would have stayed at Troy, where I could tend
Belovèd graves; Priam’s high house would stand;
I would have built a new Troy for the conquered.
But Grynean Apollo and the edicts
Of Lycia drive me into Italy.
My love, my home are this. You, though Phoenician,
Are riveted by towers in Libya.
So how can you resent us Trojans’ settling
In Italy, our lawful foreign kingdom?
When the night masks the earth with drizzling shadows,
When fiery stars rise, then the troubled ghost
Of my father, dear Anchises, hounds my dreams.
I know I cheat Ascanius, my dear son,
Out of his western realm, the fields fate grants.
The envoy of the gods, dispatched by Jove
Himself (I swear, on both our heads), brought orders
Down through the air. In the clear day I saw him
Within these walls, and these ears heard his voice.
Don’t goad me—and yourself—with these complaints.
Italy is against my will.”
Although her back was turned, she still surveyed
The speaker blankly and distractedly
Over her shoulder, then broke out in fury.
“Traitor—there is no goddess in your family,
No Dardanus. The sharp-­rocked Caucasus
345–46–­
Grynean Apollo and the
edicts of Lycia: A reference to the oracles
authorizing Aeneas’ quest; Apollo was
worshipped under the title “Grynean” in
the Aeolis, a northwestern region of Asia
Minor, and under the title “Lycian” in
southwestern Asia Minor. Compare the
oracles of Apollo at 3.161–62.
356–­
envoy of the gods: The god
Mercury.

345

350

355

360

365

365–­no goddess: Dido rejects Aeneas’
claim that his mother is Venus.
366–­Dardanus: Son of Jupiter and
Electra, ancestor of Ilus, Tros, and the
Trojans.
366–­Caucasus: Mountains between
the Black Sea and the Caspian Sea, regarded as harsh and inhospitable.

. 97 .

BOOK 4
Gave birth to you, Hyrcanian tigers nursed you.
Why pretend now? Is something worse in store?
Was there a sigh for tears of mine? A glance?
Did he give in to tears himself, or pity?
Injustice overwhelms me—which concerns
Great Juno and our father, Saturn’s son.
What bond can hold? I helped a castaway,
I shared a kingdom with him, like a fool.
The ships you lost—I saved your friends from death—
Hot madness drives me. Now the fortune-­teller
Apollo, Lycian lotteries, Jove dispatching
Dire orders earthward through the gods’ own mouthpiece—
As if such work and worry roiled their peace!
I will not cling to you or contradict you.
Ride windy waves to chase Italian kingdoms.
I hope that heaven’s conscience has the power
To trap you in the rocks and force reprisal
Down your throat, as you call my name. I’ll send—
I’ll bring black flames, I’ll hound you after cold death
Draws out my soul. Even among the dead
In hell, I’ll hear when you, at last, are paying.”
In torment, she broke off and turned away,
And ran out of his sight into the palace.
Frozen, he stood—prepared to say so much.

367–­Hyrcanian tigers: Hyrcania was
the region southeast of the Caspian Sea
and regarded as extremely wild.
372–­Saturn’s son: Jupiter. Dido here
refers to the gods as parents of humankind.
377–­Lycian lotteries: A disparaging
recasting of lines 345–46: see note.
379–­As if such work . . . peace!: In
the view of Epicureans, the gods existed,

370

375

380

385

390

but in a separate realm untroubled by
human concerns.
386–­Even among the dead: Anticipates Dido’s dying curse on Aeneas, in
which she calls for an avenger (625–29),
understood by the Roman audience to
be Hannibal of Carthage, though he is
never named in the poem, who waged
war on Rome in the Second Punic War
(218–201 BCE).

. 98 .

BOOK 4
She fainted and was lifted by her maids;
The bed inside the marble walls received her.
Now the right-­thinking hero, though he wished
To give some comfort for so great a grief,
Obeyed the gods, returning to his ships,
While he continued groaning, deeply lovesick.
The Trojans fell to work and pulled the vessels
Down from the beach in one long line. Tarred hulls
Floated. The busy crews brought leafy oars
And logs with bark still on them.
That rush from everywhere in town resembled
Ants plundering a giant heap of spelt
To store at home in readiness for winter.
Over the grass the thin black phalanx goes,
Loaded with booty. Some are heaving huge grains
Forward, and some are marshaling and prodding,
So the entire pathway hums with work.
What did you feel, then, Dido, when you saw?
How did you sob when all that shoreline seethed?
You gazed from your high tower: that whole sea
Was an industrious uproar and commotion.
Reprobate Love, wrencher of human hearts!
She’s driven now to tears, and now to beg
And cravenly submit her pride to passion—
Whatever leaves a hope of shunning death.
“Anna, you see the whole shore in a tumult.
They come from everywhere. Sails draw the breeze.
Sailors in joy hang garlands on the sterns.
As surely as I saw this great grief coming,
So surely I’ll endure. But do one service
In pity, since the traitor was your friend—
Yours only: you were trusted with his secrets,
And you know how to reach him when he’s weak.
Go, sister, kneel to my proud enemy.

. 99 .

395

400

405

410

415

420

BOOK 4
I was no Greek at Aulis when they swore
To smash his race. I sent no fleet to Troy,
Nor made his father’s ghost and ashes homeless.
How can he block his ears against my words?
Where is he running? As a last sad love gift,
He ought to wait for winds that make it easy.
I do not plead the marriage he betrayed.
Let the man go be king in charming Latium.
I just want time, a pause to heal my mind
And teach myself to mourn in my defeat.
I ask this final wretched favor, sister—
A loan—and I will give my death as interest.”
Weeping, she made this plea. Her grieving sister
Delivered it repeatedly. No tears
Could move him; no words found his sympathy.
His fate and Jupiter had barred his ears.
As in the Alps, the North Wind’s blasts assault
A solid, tough, and venerable oak,
Competing to uproot it; under hard blows,
Creaking, it spreads its high leaves on the ground
But clasps the cliff with roots that go as far
Toward hell as its top reaches up to heaven:
Just as relentless were the words that battered
The hero. Though his generous heart suffered,
The tears fell useless. His resolve endured.
Appalled now by her fate, poor Dido prayed
For death; she wished to see the sky no longer.
But there was more to drive her from the daylight:
Her gifts on incense-­burning altars rotted,

425–26–­Greek at Aulis when they
swore to smash his race: The Greek
commanders met at Aulis before setting
off to attack Troy; Agamemnon sacrificed
his daughter Iphigeneia there.

425

430

435

440

445

450

449–­The tears fell useless: Critics
debate whose tears these are, Anna’s or
Aeneas’.

. 100 .

BOOK 4
Horrible to describe; wine turned to black
And filthy gore the second that she poured it.
No one was told. Her sister did not know it.
There stood inside her home a marble shrine
To her dead husband: there she worshipped him,
Spreading white fleece and hanging holy wreaths.
She thought she heard his echoing voice call there.
When the night’s darkness covered all the earth,
She listened to a lone owl on a rooftree,
Whose song of death kept trailing into sobs.
Many grim warnings of the long-­dead seers
Panicked her too. In dreams a fierce Aeneas
Chased her. She raved in fear or was abandoned,
Friendless, forever walking a long road,
Seeking her Tyrians in a lifeless land:
So Pentheus, in madness, saw a phalanx
Of Furies, two Thebes, and a double sun;
So, in a play, the son of Agamemnon
Runs from his mother’s torches and black snakes,
While vengeful demons lurk outside the door.
Her conquered heart was full of grief and madness,
And she chose death. She had a time and method,
But hid her plan behind a face of peace
And hope, in speaking to her wretched sister.
“Anna, I’ve found a way—congratulate me!—
To bring him back or set me free from love.
Next to the setting sun and Ocean’s boundary,
In Ethiopia, where giant Atlas
469–70–­Pentheus . . . a double sun:
The Theban king Pentheus banned the
worship of Bacchus and was driven mad
by the god; this description of his hallucinations is reworked from Euripides’
Bacchae.
471–73–­the son of Agamemnon . . .

455

460

465

470

475

480

outside the door: Orestes killed his
mother, Clytemnestra, in revenge for her
murder of his father, Agamemnon. He
was pursued by his mother’s ghost and
by the Furies, snake-­haired Underworld
entities who wield torches, as related in
Aeschylus’ Oresteia.

. 101 .

BOOK 4
Turns the star-­blazing heavens on his shoulder,
Lived a Massylian priestess I’ve now found,
Who guarded the Hesperides’ shrine there,
Nourished the snake, preserved the sacred branches,
And strewed sleep-­bringing poppy and moist honey.
She says her spells soothe any minds she wishes
Or send out grueling troubles into others,
Stop rivers, turn stars backward in their courses,
And call out ghosts at night. The earth will roar
Beneath your feet, as ash trees rush down mountains.
Sister, I swear it by your darling life
And by the gods—I wouldn’t choose such weapons.
Build me a pyre in secret in the courtyard.
The arms that evil man hung in our bedroom,
The clothes he left me here, our bed of union
(My death)—put it all there. I want the remnants
Of the criminal destroyed. She’s shown me how.”
Now she was silent, and her face went pale.
But Anna didn’t guess her sister’s funeral
Hid in these strange rites, or suspect such frenzy—
What could be worse than when Sychaeus died?
She did as she was told.
Deep in the house, beneath the sky, a pyre
Now towered high, with logs of pine and oak.
The queen festooned the walls with funeral garlands.
Conscious of what must be, she put his picture
On the bed, above his sword and cast-­off clothes.
483–­Massylian: Relevant here as
tragic foreshadowing for Dido. In the
Second Punic War the North African
Massylian king Massinissa betrayed the
Carthaginians to help the Romans, but
the Romans refused to pardon his Carthaginian wife, resulting in her suicide.

485

490

495

500

505

484–­
the Hesperides’ shrine: The
Hesperides were the nymphs of the evening; their shrine, an orchard of golden
apples, was believed to be located in
northern Africa.

. 102 .

BOOK 4
Altars stood round. The loose-­haired priestess called
Countless gods—Erebus, Chaos, Hecate
With three forms, or Diana with three faces.
She sprinkled drops she said were from Avernus.
Herbs appeared, cut with bronze knives at the full moon,
Swollen and oozing coal-­black milk of poison;
A love charm too, torn from a new foal’s forehead
Before the mare could get it.
Dido, with sacred meal in clean hands, robes loose,
One sandal off, now stood at the high altar,
Called gods, called fate-­wise stars as witnesses.
She prayed to anything in heaven that sees
And punishes a broken bond of love.
Now it was night, and all earth’s weary creatures
Slept peacefully. The woods and untamed waters
Were still. The stars were halfway through their journeys
Above the tranquil fields. Cattle and bright birds
Of the broad lakes and brambly wilderness
All lay asleep beneath the noiseless sky,
Their troubles soothed, their sufferings forgotten—
But not the desolate Phoenician queen.
Her heart and eyes shunned darkness and the ease
Of sleep. Her torments thronged, her love ran wild,
Surged back and forth on seething tides of madness.
Her heart was churning with its endless questions:
“What should I do? Go back where I’ll be laughed at,
And beg to marry a Numidian prince

510–11–­
Erebus, Chaos . . . three
faces: Underworld deities; Hecate, the
three-­faced goddess of witchcraft, is associated with Diana.
512–­Avernus: The lake outside the
entrance to the Underworld.

510

515

520

525

530

535

517–18–­with sacred meal . . . one
sandal off: Loosened clothing and bare
feet aid in the working of magic.
528–­The line is thought to be spurious.
535–­Numidian: African.

. 103 .

BOOK 4
After I turned those suitors all away?
Follow the Trojan ships and do whatever
The Trojans order? Surely they’ll recall
The help I gave and, for the past’s sake, help me.
Yet—were I willing—would they let the outcast
On their proud ships? Poor fool, you’re not familiar
With treachery in Laomedon’s descendants?
Would I dog cheering sailors all alone
And leave my people? Or take Tyrian ranks
As escorts? Would those barely torn from Sidon
Endure another sea voyage on my orders?
No, die—you’ve earned it. Give the sword your sorrow.
But you, my sister, weakened by my tears,
Turned folly to disaster and defeat.
I couldn’t live a blameless life, unmarried,
Like a wild thing, and spared this agony.
I broke my promise to the dead Sychaeus.”
Out of her heart these words of sorrow broke.
On the high stern, Aeneas was asleep,
In confidence that everything was ready,
When in a dream he saw the god again:
Mercury’s face and coloring were there,
His yellow hair and handsome young man’s body.
The image spoke the warning once again:
“You sleep, child of the goddess, while disaster
Teeters unseen, and dangers lurk around?
Fool, can’t you hear the opportune West Winds?
The woman, who now knows her death is coming,
Is tossed in heaving, scheming tides of rage.

542–­
treachery in Laomedon’s de­
scendants: The Trojan ancestor Laomedon swindled the gods Apollo and Neptune out of their payment after they had
built the walls of Troy. See also 3.476n.

540

545

550

555

560

545–­Sidon: A city in Phoenicia,
Dido’s homeland.

. 104 .

BOOK 4
Bolt from here headlong, while you have the chance,
Or you’ll see storms of wreckage and the glare
Of brutal torches. Flames will fill the beach
If the dawn finds you loiter in this land.
Be quick and go! A woman is a changing,
A fitful thing.” The form ebbed into black night.
The sudden vision of this chilling shade
Ripped him from sleep. He shook his comrades too.
“Wake—now!—and take your places on the benches.
Hurry! Unfurl the sails. Once more from heaven
A god’s come, driving our escape: start cutting
The twisted ropes! We follow you, whichever
God you might be—again we hail your orders.
Be with us, guide us graciously, and bring us
Favoring stars.” He drew his flashing sword
And struck the mooring line. A single passion
Seized all of them. They ran and snatched their gear
And quit the beach. The level blue was hidden
By skimming ships. The oars raised twists of foam.
Dawn, risen from her husband’s saffron bed,
Was scattering her light across the world.
The sky grew white above the queen’s high tower.
Below, the ships went forward in a row.
The port, the shore were bare, the sailors gone.
Repeatedly she struck her lovely breast
And tore her blond hair. “Jupiter! He’s leaving?
A stranger comes—and goes—and mocks my power?
Why doesn’t the whole city arm and follow
In ships torn madly from their moorings? Hurry!
Bring torches, pass out arms, ram the oars forward!

569–70–­A woman is a changing, a
fitful thing: This quotation is sometimes
used misogynistically.
584–­her husband’s saffron bed: The

565

570

575

580

585

590

orange color of saffron makes it suitable
for the bed of the dawn goddess, but its
associations with marriage in Roman
culture highlight Dido’s abandonment.

. 105 .

BOOK 4
What? Where is this new madness taking me?
Poor thing. His crimes—you feel them only now?
You made him king. See what his word is worth!
They say he brought his household gods with him,
And hauled his frail old father on his shoulders.
I could have scattered the torn pieces of him
Across the waves. I could have killed his friends—
His son—and made a banquet for the father—
A struggle I might not have won—no matter:
I still would die. My torches should have swarmed
His camp and gangways till they made a pyre
For father, son, the whole race, and myself.
Come, Sun, the blazing lamp of all creation—
Juno, the witness and the go-­between—
And Hecate, a name shrieked at the crossroads—
Avenging Furies—and my own death demons:
Turn heaven’s justice where it should be turned.
This is my prayer now: If that living curse
Must skim his way to harbor in that country,
If Jove and fate require this to happen,
Then let a bold and warlike people drive him
Out of his realm and tear his Iulus from him.
Make him go beg for help and see the death
Of blameless friends. Degrading pacts won’t bring
The happy life he hoped for in his kingdom.
He’ll fall and lie unburied in the sand.

600–601–­scattered the torn pieces
of him across the waves: In imitation
of Medea, who scattered pieces of her
brother to slow down her father as he
pursued her.
602–­made a banquet for the father:
In imitation of Atreus who took revenge
on his brother Thyestes by serving his
children to him in a banquet.

595

600

605

610

615

620

615–29–­Then let a bold and warlike
people drive him . . . children: This is
Dido’s infamous curse, which anticipates
Hannibal.
617–­go beg for help: Aeneas begs for
assistance from the Greek king Evander
in Italy (book 8).

. 106 .

BOOK 4
And now, my last plea, gushing with my blood:
Tyrians, hound with hatred for all time
The race he founds. My ashes call from you
This service. Let there be no pacts of friendship.
Out of my grave let an avenger rise
To visit fire and sword on Trojan settlers—
Now—someday—when the power is there to strike.
Our shores will clash, weapons and seas collide.
My curse is war for Trojans and their children.”
She finished. Now her thoughts went everywhere,
Seeking the fastest way to leave the light.
She told the old nurse of Sychaeus, Barce
(Her own had died back in the fatherland),
“Darling, please bring my sister Anna—hurry!
Have her splash river water on her body
And bring the beasts and other offerings.
Cover your own brow with a reverent fillet.
I’ll now round out the ritual I started
For Jove below the earth, to end my pain,
And light the pyre that holds the Trojan’s life.”
Quickly the fond old woman hobbled off.
Now Dido’s own grim plans had made her frantic.
Her red eyes darted, and her cheeks were blotched
And shook—but she grew pale in facing death.
Frenzied, she reached the center of the house,
Climbed up the pyre and drew the Trojan sword—
A gift she’d begged, not meaning it for this.
Here she surveyed the bed she knew so well,
The Trojan clothes. In tearful contemplation
She lay a little while, and spoke these last words:
“Sweet leavings—while divine fate kept you sweet—
Receive my breath and free me from this pain.
I lived, I ran the race that fate allotted.
I’ll send the Underworld a noble ghost.
I saw the walls of my great city standing,

. 107 .

625

630

635

640

645

650

655

BOOK 4
Avenged my husband, made my brother pay.
A happy—no, a more than happy life,
If Trojan ships had never touched these shores.”
She kissed the bed. “I die without revenge—
But let me die. I like this path to darkness.
Let the cruel Trojan’s eyes take in these flames.
The omen of my death will go with him.”
Her maids now saw her falling on her sword,
Still speaking, saw her blood foam down the blade
And fleck her hands. A shout rose to the rooftop,
And through the shaken city Rumor raged.
Long-­drawn-­out shrieks of grief and women’s keening
Brimmed from the buildings. Anguish filled the sky,
As if invading troops brought Carthage down—
Or ancient Tyre were sacked—and flames were scaling
The rooftops of the houses and the temples.
Her sister heard and ran to her in panic,
Clawing her cheeks, bruising her breast with blows.
Plunging straight through the crowds, she called that doomed
name.
“This was your purpose, sister—to deceive me?
The pyre, the flames, the altars bring me this?
How could you leave me like a cast-­off thing
And go alone, and not take me along?
One sword, one hour, one agony for both!
I piled the wood, I called our fathers’ gods
To let you lie alone here, heartless monster?
You killed yourself and me, your city’s people,
And the Phoenician lords. Come, give me water
To wash these wounds—and if a last breath hovers,
My mouth will take it.” She had climbed the pyre,
And held her sister now, that fading life,
658–­
If Trojan ships had never
touched these shores: Vergil reworks

660

665

670

675

680

685

Medea’s wish about the Argonauts in
Ennius’ play Medea.

. 108 .

BOOK 4
And moaned and mopped the black blood with her clothes.
Dido now strained to lift her heavy eyes
But failed. Around the sword, her breast’s wound hissed.
Three times she rose a little, on her elbow,
Collapsed each time, and with her wandering vision
Searched for the bright high sky and sighed to find it.
Queen Juno cut her torture short, in pity,
Dispatching Iris earthward from Olympus
To free the struggling spirit from its bonds.
There was no fate or justice in her death.
Her madness brought a wretched early end,
Proserpina had cut no lock of blond hair
To dedicate this life to Stygian Orcus,
So dewy Iris swooped on saffron wings,
Trailing a thousand sun-­reflecting colors,
And floated near her head. “I am to take
This gift to Dis and free you from your body.”
Her right hand made the stroke. All living heat
Vanished, and life dissolved into the wind.

694–­Iris: Goddess of the rainbow, a
messenger of the gods.
698–99–­Proserpina had cut no lock
. . . to Stygian Orcus: Proserpina, queen

690

695

700

705

of the Underworld, snips a lock of hair
from the dying to offer to Pluto (Orcus);
as Dido’s death is unexpected, Iris must
snip it instead.

. 109 .

BOOK 5

Aeneas staunchly voyaged out with his fleet,
Cutting the waves the driving North Wind darkened.
He saw behind him poor Elissa’s fire,
A huge glow in the fort—but what had caused it
The Trojans couldn’t tell. Yet what they knew
Of woman’s rage from ruined love’s hard grief
Gave them a grim foreboding in their hearts.
They sailed the open water; no land met them,
Yet everywhere were sea and sky alone.
But then a purple-­black light-­stifling storm
Came swooping down. Night bristled on the water.
On the high stern, the pilot Palinurus
Himself cried, “These huge thunderheads that wrap
The sky—what are you doing, Father Neptune?
Row hard and pull the tackle in,” he ordered.
He sloped the sails against the wind and added,
“No hope for Italy in such foul weather,
Not even if Jove promised, brave Aeneas.
The black west sends a rising, roaring wind
Into our side. Air thickens into cloud.
We haven’t got the strength to fight against it.
Fortune has triumphed, and we must submit,
Turning our course her way. We near the havens
Of Sicily and your loyal brother Eryx,
If I recall the stars I traced in coming.”
24–­Eryx: Half-­brother of Aeneas by
Venus, after whom a city and mountain
in Sicily are named.

. 110 .

5

10

15

20

25

BOOK 5
Steadfast Aeneas answered, “I have watched you
Struggling against insistent winds and losing.
Shift the sails, turn. There’s no land I prefer
To send these tired ships to than the one
That keeps for me Dardanian Acestes
And holds my father’s bones in its embrace.”
They sought the port. Favoring West Winds hurried
The fleet’s stretched sails across the deep. They turned
At last toward welcome and familiar beaches.
Startled to see them from a far-­off peak,
Acestes rushed to greet the kindred ships.
Child of a Trojan mother and the river
Crinisus, he now wore rough Libyan bearskin
And carried sharp spears. Mindful of his lineage,
He happily received his weary friends
As guests again, in rustic luxury.
The stars were routed by the brightening dawn.
From the long beach Aeneas called his comrades
Together and addressed them from a raised mound:
“Descendants of high gods, heroic Trojans,
One circling year is full, its months completed,
From when we laid my honored father’s bones
In the ground and consecrated his sad altar.
This seems to be the bitter day the gods
Decreed that I commemorate forever.
If I were exiled in Gaetulian Syrtes,
Or caught by storms and captive in Mycenae,
30–­Dardanian Acestes: A Trojan
leader who has settled in Sicily; he is
called Dardanian after Dardanus, the
Italian ancestor of the Trojans.
46–­One circling year is full: A year
has passed since the end of book 3, when
the Trojans buried Anchises on this shore.

30

35

40

45

50

51– ­Gaetulian Syrtes: Dangerous
sandbanks near Carthage in North
Africa, where the Gaetuli lived.
52–­Mycenae: A major Greek city, the
home of Agamemnon.

. 111 .

BOOK 5
Still I would carry out these solemn rites
And pile the altar with the proper gifts.
But here we are now, at a friendly port,
And in the bones’ and ashes’ very presence.
It must have been the gods’ will that achieved this.
So let us all be glad in this observance,
Ask for good winds, and pray he’ll grant this rite
Each year in our new city, in his own shrine.
Acestes, who was born at Troy, will give you
Two oxen for each ship. Invite our home gods,
Our country’s, and our host’s to share the feast.
But when the ninth dawn brings the nurturing day
To mortals, and its beams light up earth’s circle,
I’ll hold a race for speedy Trojan ships.
Strong runners, too, and hardy, confident
Masters of javelins and buoyant arrows,
Any bold boxers with their rawhide thongs
Can step up. There are prizes for the winners.
Place garlands on your heads, in holy silence.”
He hid his forehead in his mother’s myrtle.
Helymus did the same, and old Acestes,
And also young Ascanius and his peers.
With a great crowd of soldiers for an escort,
Aeneas left the conclave for the grave mound.
There on the ground he poured two ritual cups
Each of unmixed wine, fresh milk, holy blood,
And scattered purple flowers. “Hallowed father,
I call unceasingly to your poor spirit,

59–­this rite: Aeneas is credited with
founding the Roman festival of Parentalia, which honors family ancestors.
72–­
his mother’s myrtle: Myrtle is
sacred to Venus.

55

60

65

70

75

80

73–­Helymus: Son of Anchises, half-­
brother of Aeneas.

. 112 .

BOOK 5
Your ghost: the body that I saved is ashes.
I couldn’t seek with you our fated lands
In Italy, and a river called the Tiber.”
Then from beneath that holy site there slipped
A giant snake, who drew his seven coils
Gently around the barrow and the altar.
His back was blazoned blue, and gold-­flecked scales
Kindled and glowed, as when a rainbow catches
The sun, and myriad colors strike the clouds.
Aeneas was amazed. It stretched its great length
Among the bowls and polished cups. It tasted
The dishes and slid back beneath the tomb
Harmlessly from the banquet on the altar.
The son resumed the rites with greater fervor.
Was this the place’s spirit? Or his father’s
Attendant? Now he sacrificed two sheep,
Two sows, and two black bullocks, poured out wine,
And called upon the soul of great Anchises,
The ghost that Acheron had now released.
With a good will each comrade brought the gifts
That he could spare, killed bulls, and heaped the altar.
Others lined cauldrons up and then stretched out
On the grass to roast the spitted meat on coals.
The long-­awaited ninth day came. The horses
Of Phaethon brought dawn in pleasant weather.
The fame of glorious Acestes drew
The eager neighboring tribes. They filled the shore
To see Aeneas’ men—or challenge them.

82–83–­our fated lands in Italy, and
a river called the Tiber: Aeneas is only
vaguely aware of his destination.

85

90

95

100

105

99–­Acheron: A river in the Underworld.
105–­Phaethon: Here the sun, literally
“shining one.”

. 113 .

BOOK 5
At the start, the center of the field displayed
The prizes for the winners: sacred tripods,
Garlands, palm branches, clothing dyed with purple,
Along with massive bars of gold and silver.
From a mound, a trumpet’s blare began the games.
For the first contest, four ships, closely matched,
With heavy oars were chosen from the fleet.
Mnestheus took the Whale, with its keen rowers
(In Italy, the Memmian clan is his),
And Gyas the Chimera’s hulking mass,
A town’s size, rearing triple banks of oars
And driven forward by the youth of Troy.
Sergestus, father of the Sergian house,
Rode the vast Centaur; sky-­blue Scylla carried
Cloanthus: the Cluentii are his.
In open sea, far from the foaming shore,
A rock lies, sometimes sunk in swollen waves
When the northeastern storms conceal the stars.
Now it rose quiet from the tranquil water,
Its flat top welcome to the sunning gulls.
Father Aeneas set a leafy oak branch
Out there to show the sailors where to turn
And bend their lengthy courses back again.
They drew for starting places, and the captains
Stood on the sterns in glowing gold and purple.
The young men in the crews wore poplar garlands.
Their shoulders glistened with the oil rubbed on.
They sat and took a tight grip on their oars,
109–10–­the center of the field dis­
played the prizes for the winners: The
games for Anchises are modeled on the
funeral games for Patroclus in Iliad 23.
116–23–­Mnestheus . . . Cluentii: The
key racers are ancestors of powerful Roman families of Vergil’s time.

110

115

120

125

130

135

118–­Chimera: Named for the fire-­
breathing monster killed by the hero Bellerophon.
129–­Father Aeneas: Aeneas takes on
the leadership role more fully after his
father’s death.

. 114 .

BOOK 5
Keen for the signal; throbbing trepidation,
Hot greed for praise clutched at their leaping hearts.
The trumpet blared, and instantly they sprang
Over the line. Their shouting struck the sky.
Their arms drew back, they whipped the sea to foam.
The ships cut trenches in a row. The surface
Split with the force of oars and trident beaks.
Chariots never with such plunging speed
Poured from the gate and tore along the course,
Their drivers shaking free the waving reins
And bending forward to apply the whip.
Then the whole forest roared with the applause
Of partisans. The deep-­set bay sent voices
Rolling, the hills recoiled from pounding shouts.
First Gyas slipped ahead across the waves,
Beyond the crowded clatter. Then Cloanthus
Chased him, although the heavy pine hull hampered
His better crew. The Centaur and the Whale,
An equal space behind, fought for third place.
Now the Whale has it, now the giant Centaur
Passes him, now the two prows shoot in tandem,
While long salt furrows trail behind the hulls.
But now they neared the rock, their turning post.
Gyas, the halfway victor, kept the lead.
He shouted to Menoetes at the helm:
“Why are you headed so far right? Turn this way!
Keep to the shore! Your oars should graze the crags.
The rest can sail the sea.” But still Menoetes,
Who dreaded hidden rocks, swerved toward the deep.
“Where are you going? Toward the rocks, I said!”
Yelled Gyas. Looking back, he saw Cloanthus
Gaining—and circling closer to the shore,
Between his own ship and the sounding cliffs.
He scraped his way through, quickly passed the leader—
Beyond the turning post he reached safe waters.

. 115 .

140

145

150

155

160

165

170

BOOK 5
Fury flamed in the other captain’s young bones.
Tears on his cheeks, forgetting dignity
And safety, he threw circumspect Menoetes
Out of the lofty stern into the sea.
He took the helm himself now, as the pilot,
Urged on the men and swung the rudder shoreward.
Menoetes (in a while) escaped the sea floor,
Old as he was and hampered by his wet clothes.
He climbed the rock and settled on a dry ledge.
Trojans had laughed to see him fall and swim,
And now they laughed to see him spewing brine.
Sergestus and Mnestheus, who were last,
Were thrilled—they might pass Gyas as he lingered.
Sergestus pulled ahead—but it was only
By half a length—as he approached the rock.
Alongside skimmed the Whale’s competing prow.
Mnestheus paced amidships, rallying
His crew: “Heave! Throw your whole strength into it!
Comrades of Hector, allies whom I chose
In Troy’s last crisis: show the strength and courage
That served you at the sandbanks of the Syrtes,
Ionian seas, and savage Malean waves.
I don’t demand the glory of first place
(And yet—no, Neptune, you must choose the winner).
But last! Humiliation! That at least
We must avoid.” They made a flat-­out effort.
The bronze-­beaked ship was trembling with the blows.
The surface slipped away, the panting shook
Arms, legs, and dry mouths. Sweat flowed down in streams.
It was mere chance that brought the men their triumph.
193–­Malean waves: Cape Maleas, on
the southeastern coast of the Peloponnese, is treacherous for shipping.

. 116 .

175

180

185

190

195

200

BOOK 5
Sergestus in his fervor drove his prow
Close to the rock—an inside, risky passage—
And caught disastrously on jutting outcrops.
His oars struck those rough edges with a crunch.
The prow was rammed and hung above the water.
With shouts, the crew sprang up and steadied her,
And took out pointed rods and poles made stiffer
With iron to fish back their broken oars.
Mnestheus, even keener in his good luck,
With a swift sweep of oars, invoking winds,
Sped to the shore across the open water,
Like a dove startled from her darling nestlings
Hidden in crannies of a soft-­stone cave
That is her home. She bursts out with a clatter
Into the countryside, then coasts through air
That’s calm and clear, and stills her rapid wings.
Like her the Whale flew, on its own momentum,
And sliced the surface at the course’s end,
Leaving Sergestus struggling on a sharp rock
At first, then in the shallows as he yelled
For help and learned to make his way with split oars.
Still, he reached Gyas and the huge Chimera;
Robbed of its pilot, this one fell behind.
Only Cloanthus needed overtaking.
Mnestheus, with all his power, chased him.
The noise swelled on the shore, everyone clamored
For the ship in second place. The high air echoed.
The leader’s crew would have been mortified
To lose their victory, glory worth their lives!
The others’ strength was growing as they gained:
Now neck and neck, they might have won together,
Had not Cloanthus, arms held toward the sea,
Poured out this prayer and made the gods this promise:
“Hear, ocean’s rulers, on whose plain I move:

. 117 .

205

210

215

220

225

230

235

BOOK 5
To pay my vow as victor on the shore,
I’ll set a snow-­white bull before your altar,
And give your salt waves flowing wine and entrails.”
In the deep current all the Nereids heard,
All Phorcus’ troupe, and virgin Panopea.
The father, God of Ports, pushed with his huge hand;
The ship shot past the speed of wind or arrows
And bolted to the deep protecting harbor.
Anchises’ son then duly told the herald
To call the people and announce Cloanthus
The winner. A fresh bay wreath hid his temples.
Aeneas let each crew divide the prizes:
Three heifers, wine, a hundredweight of silver.
Particular awards were for the captains:
The winner got a gold cloak, with two waves
Of Meliboean purple on its border,
Ganymede woven in, on leafy Ida,
A fierce-­speared runner-­down of speedy stags,
Panting like life—but now caught up on high
In the hooked claws of Jove’s swift armor-­bearer.
His aged minders reached up helplessly
To the stars, and dogs bayed, menacing the air.
The man whose skill had gained him second place
Got a gold breastplate, triple-­meshed and polished;
Aeneas’s spoil from Demoleos beaten

239–41–­Nereids . . . Phorcus . . .
Panopea . . . God of Ports: Oceanic
deities. Phorcus is an old man of the sea.
Panopea is a Nereid, or sea nymph. Portunus was the God of Ports.
246–­bay wreath: A symbol of victory in athletic and artistic competition;
in Rome, it was awarded to generals in
military parades called triumphs.
251–­Meliboean purple: A rich red-­

240

245

250

255

260

purple. The dye was extracted from sea
snails.
252–­Ganymede . . . Ida: The Trojan
prince Ganymede was abducted from
Mount Ida near Troy by Jupiter: see
1.28n.
255–­hooked claws: Of the eagle,
Jupiter’s bird.
260–­Demoleos: A Greek warrior at
Troy, killed on the battlefield there.

. 118 .

BOOK 5
Near rushing Simoïs under towering Troy.
The battle refuge graced another man now—
Two servants, Sagaris and Phegeus,
Staggered beneath its layered weight. Demoleos
Had worn it running after Trojan stragglers.
The third prize was a pair of matched bronze caldrons,
And solid silver cups, rugged with carvings.
And while the victors swaggered in the thrill
Of rich rewards, red ribbons on their heads,
Sergestus reached the shore. He’d worked his hull free
From the cruel rock, lost his oars, and bashed a row
Of oarlocks useless. He won only laughter.
His ship was like a snake caught on the road’s edge,
Cut across by a bronze wheel or left mangled
And half-­dead by a traveler’s heavy stone.
It tries to whip away, but this is hopeless—
The hissing, arching head and burning eyes
Are held back by the crippled part that knots
The struggling creature back upon itself.
Like this the ship moved, with its ruined oars;
And yet it reached the port with full-­spread sails.
Aeneas, happy that the crew and vessel
Were saved, gave to Sergestus what he’d promised:
A Cretan slave girl, Pholoë, nursing twins,
And skillful at Minerva’s weaving work.
Righteous Aeneas, at this contest’s end,
Strode toward the grassy field that was surrounded
By wooded hills, a natural stadium
For a racetrack. Thousands trailed behind the hero.
Seated amid the stands there on a platform,
He offered prizes to entice the daring
285–­Minerva’s weaving work: Mi‑
nerva is the patron of crafts, especially
weaving.

. 119 .

265

270

275

280

285

290

BOOK 5
Of anyone considering the footrace.
Competitors converged—Trojans, Sicilians—
First Nisus and Euryalus;
Euryalus a handsome, blooming youth
Whom Nisus loved devotedly. Diores
Came next, a prince of Priam’s peerless bloodline;
Then Salius, an Acarnanian;
And Patron, an Arcadian Tegean;
In old Acestes’ cohort, Helymus
And Panopes, youths from Sicilian woodlands;
And many more, obscure, unknowable.
Aeneas, in the center of them, spoke:
“I know you’ll be delighted when you hear this:
No one will leave without a gift from me.
Two spearheads of bright iron, worked in Crete,
And a two-­headed ax embossed in silver
Will honor everyone. But olive leaves
Of tawny green will crown the fastest three.
The winner gets a horse with handsome trappings,
The next an Amazonian quiver full
Of Thracian arrows, with a wide gold strap
Whose buckle is a solid polished gem.
This Argive helmet must content the third.”
The runners took their places. At the signal,
They sprang across the line and down the course,
Pouring like clouds. Now with the goal in sight,
Nisus flashed out ahead and took the lead
As swiftly as the wind or wings of thunder.
The next, but with a lengthy gap before him,

294–­Nisus and Euryalus: A warrior
couple modeled on Homeric and Platonic ideals. They will appear again at
9.174–449.

295

300

305

310

315

320

311–12–­
Amazonian quiver full of
Thracian arrows: The Amazons were
known for their skill at archery; Thracians were considered especially fierce
and warlike.

. 120 .

BOOK 5
Was Salius; Euryalus came third,
Some distance back.
Helymus followed him, and right behind
Diores sped—his foot brushed on a heel,
His shoulder loomed. And had the track been longer
He would have slipped ahead or tied for fourth.
But as they came exhausted to the last stretch,
Poor Nisus skidded on some slippery blood
That had poured out and wet the grassy ground
When, as it happened, steers were slaughtered there.
Already thrilled with victory, the young man
Couldn’t secure his step, and staggered, fell
Face-­first in filthy dung and sacred blood.
But with his dear Euryalus in mind,
He lurched up from the muck—in Salius’ way.
A rapid somersault laid him on hard sand.
Through his friend’s help, Euryalus flashed by
And flew in first, with roaring crowds to greet him.
Helymus came in next, Diores third.
Through the whole vast arena, where the elders
Watched from the front, the yells of Salius rang,
Demanding the award a foul had stolen.
The crowd, though, backed Euryalus’ shy tears—
And the great beauty of his budding manhood.
Diores helped him with his own loud protests:
He’d won the third prize, but it would be void
If Salius was now to have the first.
Father Aeneas answered: “All your prizes
Are safe, boys: nobody will change the order.
But I can soothe a friend who’s been unlucky.”
To Salius he gave a lion’s pelt
From Libya: huge, heavy-­maned, and gold-­clawed.
But Nisus said, “If that’s what losers get,
And accidents win pity, what’s for me?
I deserved first prize, and I would have won it,

. 121 .

325

330

335

340

345

350

355

BOOK 5
But for the same bad luck that Salius had.”
He gestured to the wet dung on his face
And body. The good father of the Trojans
Laughed and had fetched a shield that Didymaon
Had made—Greek spoil from Neptune’s holy door—
A splendid gift for this outstanding youth.
When all of this was done, Aeneas said:
“Whoever has staunch ready manhood in him,
Let him step up and bind and raise his fists.”
He set out two more prizes: for the winner,
A bull with gilded horns and hanging ribbons;
A sword and splendid helmet, loser’s solace.
Unhesitating, Dares thrust his jaw out
And rose in all his strength. The whole crowd murmured.
He alone had been used to fighting Paris;
He’d crushed the champion, huge Butes (boasting
Lineage from Bebrycian Amycus)
And laid him out to die on tawny sand
Beside the tomb where peerless Hector rested.
Such a man reared his towering head to fight,
Showed his wide shoulders, shot out first one arm
And then the other, hammering the air.
The second boxer? Out of that whole crowd,
No one dared wrap his hands in thongs to face him.
Thinking they were conceding him the prize,
He took a happy stand below Aeneas.
His left hand gripped the bull’s horn, and he spoke:
“So, goddess’ son, if no one’s brave enough,
How long exactly should I stand here waiting?
Tell me to take my prize.” All of the Trojans

359–­Didymaon: Not otherwise
known.
366–­ribbons: See 2.133n.

360

365

370

375

380

385

372–­Lineage from Bebrycian Amy­
cus: Amycus, king of the savage Bebryces, forced strangers to box with him for
their lives.

. 122 .

BOOK 5
Roared for the man to have the promised trophy.
Acestes was disgruntled with Entellus,
Who sat beside him on a bench of green turf:
“You were the strongest—once. What use is that?
You’ll let this splendid prize be snatched away
Without a fight? What good is godlike Eryx
You claim as teacher? What about your fame
Throughout this land, the prizes on your walls?”
Entellus shot back: “It’s not fear defeating
My lust for fame, but slow and freezing blood
Of old age, and my cold depleted strength.
If I were in my prime still, like that fellow—
So insolent, full of himself, cocksure—
I’d take my place, but not to win a fine bull.
Prizes don’t draw me.” Into the arena
He threw a pair of hugely heavy gauntlets
Whose hard hide savage Eryx used to wrap
Around his hands for every boxing battle.
The crowd gaped: riveted with lead and iron
To stiffen them were seven massive bulls’ hides.
Dares backed well away in stupefaction;
Anchises’ brave son turned them over, testing
The weight of those immense loops in his hands.
The veteran boxer spoke then, from his heart:
“What if we saw what Hercules himself wore
In the tough contest on this very beach?
Your brother Eryx had these on his hands once
(Look at the caked brains, and the spattered blood)
And faced that hero, and I used to wear them

387–­Entellus: Not otherwise known;
there was a city in Sicily called Entella.
401–5–­hugely heavy gauntlets . . .
seven massive bulls’ hides: Roman boxers protected their hands by wearing the

390

395

400

405

410

leather caestus, which extended from the
knuckles up the forearm.
410–­Hercules: Aeneas’ half-­brother
Eryx was killed by Hercules in a wrestling match.

. 123 .

BOOK 5
In my strong-­blooded years, when jealous old age
Had not yet sowed the white hairs on my temples.
If Dares, though, demurs, and good Aeneas
Chooses, and if Acestes my supporter
Agrees, we’ll make it fair and take away
Eryx’ straps and your Trojan ones—don’t worry.”
He dropped his cloak of double thickness, stripping
The body with the massive joints, bones, arms,
And took his hulking stand in the arena.
Anchises’ son, the father, brought out matched thongs
And bound the hands of both with equal weapons.
They didn’t pause but faced off, on their toes,
Fearless, alert, their hands up in the air.
Their heads were reared far back and out of range.
Fists tangled, sparred, and sought an opening.
The one was younger, quicker on his feet,
The other stronger, larger, but his knees
Faltered, and weary panting shook his bulk.
Often they missed in swinging at each other,
But often loudly thumped against a chest
Or curved-­in side; fists darted around temples
And ears, jaws crackled under stony blows.
Entellus’ feet were rooted in position—
But sharp eyes kept his body swaying, dodging.
Dares, as if he stormed a city’s bulwarks
Or kept a mountain fortress under siege,
Scanned thoroughly and shrewdly for a gap,
And drove assaults from everywhere—for nothing.
Entellus sprang and thrust his right arm up,
Then down. His quick opponent saw it falling,
Instantly slipped aside, and wasn’t there.
Entellus spilled his strength into the air.
The force of his own vast weight sent him crashing
Like a hollow pine tree torn up at the roots

. 124 .

415

420

425

430

435

440

445

BOOK 5
On Erymanthus or the heights of Ida.
Trojans, Sicilians, on their feet, were yelling
Clear to the sky. Acestes, though, his agemate
And friend, ran up and lifted him in pity.
But the fall didn’t slow or cow the hero,
Who came back fiercer, stronger in his anger
And searing shame, self-­conscious in his courage.
Over the whole arena he pitched Dares.
He battered with his right hand, then his left,
Not letting up. Like clouds that pound the rooftops
With hail, the hero pummeled his opponent
Ceaselessly with both fists and sent him spinning.
Father Aeneas now was moved to check
The savage anger of Entellus, ending
The fight—a rescue for exhausted Dares—
And did it with these sympathetic words:
“Poor friend, where has your mind gone? Don’t you sense
Some strength here more than his? Gods are against you:
Relent.” He caused the boxers to be parted.
Staunch comrades led the loser to the ships.
His head lolled, and he dragged his crippled knees.
He spat out broken teeth and clotted blood.
Others were called to claim his sword and helmet,
Leaving the bull and garland for Entellus.
The victor, full of heady pride, proclaimed:
“Son of the goddess, and you other Trojans:
Think of the strength I had when I was young—
Think of the death from which you just saved Dares.”
Before the young bull waiting as a prize
The boxer stood and faced him. Looming high
449–­Erymanthus: A mountain in
Arcadia, famous for its monstrous wild
boar, which Hercules slew.

. 125 .

450

455

460

465

470

475

BOOK 5
He aimed a hard-­bound hand between the horns,
Shattered the creature’s skull, and splashed its brains out.
Shaking in death, it crumpled and collapsed,
And over it he spoke these fervent words:
“Eryx, I give to you this better soul
Than Dares’—and unbind my hands forever.”
Soon after this, Aeneas sought contestants
For soaring archery and set out prizes.
His brawny hands took from Serestus’ ship
The mast and planted it and tied a dove—
The target—to a rope looped through the top.
In a bronze helmet rivals tossed their lots.
Hippocoön, the son of Hyrtacus,
Was chosen, to warm cheers, to take the first turn.
Next was Mnestheus, who’d won the ship race
And his bright olive crown; Eurytion
Was third—your brother, famous Pandarus,
Who broke the truce on orders from a god
And launched a weapon at the warrior Greeks.
Acestes’ was the last lot in the helmet—
He dared to try the work of younger men.
Now each one took an arrow from his quiver
And bent his curving bow with burly arms.
An arrow first soared off the twanging string
Of Hyrtacus’ son, sliced the air in two,
And hit the wooden mast straight on and lodged.
The pole shook, and the terrified dove flapped,
And the whole valley echoed with applause.
Now fierce Mnestheus stood and drew his weapon
And aimed high, straining both his bow and eyes.
495–­Pandarus: A Trojan archer who
broke the ceasefire during the duel between Menelaus and Paris in Iliad 4.

. 126 .

480

485

490

495

500

505

BOOK 5
Too bad! The steel tip failed to reach the bird,
But broke the knotted linen string that tethered
The creature by the foot atop the mast.
She sped off toward the storm clouds in the south.
Eurytion had drawn his bow already;
He quickly aimed, while praying to his brother.
With joy and clapping wings she’d reached the free sky
Beneath the clouded darkness, when he shot her.
She fell and left her life among the stars,
But brought to earth again the piercing arrow.
Acestes’ chance was gone—he still let fly
An arrow to the upper air, which showed
His bow-­resounding skill, though he was old.
An omen flashed—its meaning the great outcome
Proved in the time to come, when fearsome prophets
Chanted of signs that lagged in their fulfillment.
The arrow soared in flame through flowing clouds,
Burning a path that faded out and tattered
In breezes: thus a star that’s been dislodged
Crosses the sky and trails its hair behind it.
Both Trojans and Sicilians were astonished
And begged the gods to keep them safe. Aeneas
The great revered the omen and embraced
Happy Acestes, heaped on gifts, and spoke:
“Accept these, Father, since Olympus’ great king
Has marked you out for some supreme distinction.
This embossed bowl, a precious gift from Cisseus,
Keepsake and token of a loving friendship,
Belonged to my own father, old Anchises.”

514–­his brother: Pandarus: see
5.495n.
522–­
An omen flashed: The omen
may portend the greatness of Acestes and
his city Segesta.

510

515

520

525

530

535

535–­Cisseus: Father of Hecuba, the
wife of Priam.

. 127 .

BOOK 5
He ringed Acestes’ head with verdant laurel
And named him winner over all the others.
Eurytion—fine boy—did not resent it,
Though he’d brought down the bird. The next gifts went
To the rope’s breaker; then the one whose winging
Arrow had pierced the mast got his reward.
Father Aeneas didn’t end the games
Till he had called Epytides, dear tutor
Of little Iulus. To this trusty man
He whispered, “Go and tell Ascanius,
If he’s drawn up the squad of boys on horses,
To lead it out, for his grandfather’s sake,
And put his armed maneuvers on display.”
Aeneas had the field, in its long circuit,
Cleared—people had been pouring onto it.
Before their fathers’ eyes, the boys filed in,
Gleaming on bridled horses. Both Sicilians
And Trojans buzzed approval at their coming.
A ritual trimmed chaplet bound each boy’s head;
Each had a pair of steel-­tipped cornel spears;
Some had smooth quivers. From their necks hung circles
Of pliant gold that twisted at their throats.
Three troops of riders, each one with its leader,
Wove their way; twelve boys in each double file
Followed their captains in a neat division.
One young glad line was led by little Priam,
Polites’ son (bright bearer of a great name
One father back), who’d sire new Italians.
His Thracian horse was dappled, with white pasterns;
The forehead that it reared was splashed with white.
Iulus’ beloved agemate led the next squad,
545–­Epitydes: Periphas, son of Epytus, from Homer, Iliad 17.

540

545

550

555

560

565

551–­the field, in its long circuit: It
resembles the Circus Maximus in Rome.

. 128 .

BOOK 5
Atys, the Latin Atii clan’s forebear;
Iulus, best-­looking of the boys, came last.
His mount was Tyrian; shining Dido gave it
To be his own, for loving memory’s sake.
The other boys were on Sicilian horses,
The gifts of old Acestes.
The Trojans cheered their shy sons and were happy
To see ancestral faces replicated.
In joy they passed the crowd, their families watching.
The line paused. From the side, Epytides
Signaled, first with a shout and then a whip crack.
Now the three squads, each in two columns, wheeled
Apart to right and left. Another signal:
They turned back, aiming weapons at each other.
Then they made other moves and countermoves,
Faced off at distances and overlapped
In rings, and acted out armed skirmishes.
They fled, their backs defenseless, turned their spears
For an attack, then rode together, peaceful.
Like high Crete’s fabled labyrinth that wove
Its baffling paths within its blinding walls,
With countless tricks to keep its captives lost,
Confusing any signs that might have led them—
So was the Trojan sons’ game as they wove
A running pattern, mock attacks and mock
Retreats, like dolphins playing in the waves
Cutting the Libyan or Carpathian straits.
When he was building Alba Longa’s walls,
Ascanius revived the battle pageant

569–­Atii: Augustus’ mother, Atia,
was a member of the Atian family, or Atii.
588–­
Crete’s fabled labyrinth: The
maze designed by the inventor Daedalus
to imprison the Minotaur.

570

575

580

585

590

595

595–­Carpathian: Of the island Carpathus, between Crete and Rhodes.

. 129 .

BOOK 5
And taught the ancient Latins to perform it,
As he had done with fellow Trojan youngsters.
The Albans passed it down. Rome in her glory
Is heir to this ancestral ritual.
The boys are “Troy” and their formation “Trojan.”
With this, the honored father’s games concluded.
Now, in a fresh turn, Fortune changed allegiance.
While all these sports were offered to the tomb,
Juno the child of Saturn sent down Iris
To the Trojan fleet, and sped the wind behind her,
Plotting to satisfy her long-­held rancor.
Over the thousand colors of the rainbow
The goddess swiftly skimmed, and no one saw her.
Beyond the crowd, she passed along the shore
And saw the fleet left empty in the port.
The Trojan women stood and mourned Anchises
On a lonely beach. They gazed out at the deep
In tears, and all deplored how many seas
Remained to cross—how it exhausted them!
“A city! Not the sufferings of voyages!”
Iris, skilled meddler, slipped among the mothers
Of Troy, and she exchanged the face and clothing
Of a goddess for the form of Beroë,
The long-­lived wife of Doryclus of Tmaros.
Well known and nobly born, she’d been a mother.
“Wretches,” cried Iris, “not dragged off to death
By warring Greeks beneath your city’s walls!
What doom does Fortune keep for our poor people?
The seventh summer since Troy’s fall is passing.
Driven from star to star across the seas,
601–­this ancestral ritual: The “Troy
game,” an equestrian display performed
by Roman youths of noble birth, was re-

600

605

610

615

620

625

vived by Julius Caesar and brought into
regular practice by Augustus.

. 130 .

BOOK 5
The whole world’s lands and wrecking rocks, we’re wave-­tossed
On the great gulf. Italy retreats from us.
Now our own Eryx’ land, our host Acestes
Must let us found a city of our own.
Fatherland! Gods we saved from war for nothing!
What walls will have Troy’s name? Where will I see
A Simoïs and Xanthus, Hector’s rivers?
So come, let’s burn these ships that brought such sorrow.
In a dream, I saw the prophetess Cassandra;
She gave me burning torches: ‘Find your Troy here—
This is your home.’ Now is the time to act—
Quickly, on such great signs. Here are four altars
Of Neptune. He will give us fire and courage.”
She was the first to seize destroying flames.
She raised a torch and waved it. Then she strained
And threw it as the Trojan women watched
In horror. But the oldest of them, Pyrgo,
The nurse of Priam’s many children, shouted,
“Mothers, this isn’t Rhoetean Beroë,
Doryclus’ wife! Look at the godly splendor
Shown in her burning eyes, her haughtiness,
Her face, the way her voice sounds, and her gait.
And I myself have just left Beroë
Sick, and upset that she alone was missing
Her portion in these honors for Anchises.”
So she spoke.
The matrons didn’t know what they should do.
They glowered at the boats, in bitter yearning
To stay, yet thinking of the fated kingdom.
But as she fled on even wings, the goddess
Cut a great rainbow underneath the clouds.
632–­Gods: The Penates. See 1.379n.
636–­the prophetess Cassandra: see
2.346, 3.183–87.

. 131 .

630

635

640

645

650

655

BOOK 5
This apparition made the women shriek,
Frenzied. Some pillaged central hearths of buildings,
While others snatched up kindling, leaves—then torches
From altars. Over painted sterns and benches
And oars the god of fire ran amok.
Eumelus brought the news to the arena
Next to Anchises’ tomb; but on their own there,
Men saw a cloud of ashes surging skyward.
Ascanius capered at his squadron’s head—
But now his panting trainers couldn’t catch him:
He’d turned and galloped to the camp in riot.
“What are you doing? Have you lost your minds?
Poor Trojan women! It’s no hostile Greek camp
You’re burning, but your future. This is me,
Your own Ascanius!” At their feet he dashed
The helmet worn just now in that staged battle.
Aeneas rushed in, with a host of Trojans.
The women scattered, panicked, on the shore,
Then skulked away to trees and rocky hollows.
Shame drove them to the darkness; they awoke
To know their own and free their hearts from Juno.
And yet their raging fire didn’t slacken.
The caulking was alive beneath the wet wood,
Vomiting steady waves of smoke. Unyielding,
The flame of ruin ate the hulls, the whole ships;
The floods strong heroes hauled there couldn’t stop it.
Loyal Aeneas, clothes torn from his shoulders,
Begged for the gods’ help, stretching out his hands:
“Almighty Jove, unless you hate us Trojans
To the last man, and human suffering
Moves you no longer, let our fleet escape!
Save our exhausted race from ruin, Father!
Or hurl your thunderbolt of devastation
At what remains of us—if I deserve it.”
He’d scarcely finished when a monstrous black storm

. 132 .

660

665

670

675

680

685

690

BOOK 5
Broke in a rage of pouring rain and thunder.
The plains and mountains shook. The whole wild sky
Slid down in blackness through the whirling South Winds—
The decks filled up, the half-­burned wood was soaked—
And now the fire was completely out,
And all the ships but four were saved from ruin.
A hard blow for the patriarch Aeneas!
Tormented back and forth, he didn’t know
Whether to stay in these Sicilian fields,
Shirking his fate, or reach for Italy.
Old Nautes spoke, Tritonian Athena’s
Own chosen pupil, who was known for skill
In prophecies of what the forceful anger
Of gods would bring—he knew the links in fate’s chain.
He comforted Aeneas: “Venus’ son,
Staying or going, we must follow fate.
Whatever comes, endurance conquers fortune.
Here is Acestes, Trojan child of heaven.
Make plans with him—he’ll be a willing partner.
Leave him the lost ships’ orphans, leave him those
Exasperated by your great task’s hardships.
Spare the old men and ocean-­weary mothers,
And anyone who’s weak or shy of danger,
And let them rest and have their city here,
Named for Acestes, if he will allow it.”
The words of his old friend excited him,
But he was torn between anxieties.
Now black Night’s chariot had reached its zenith.
Father Anchises’ image came from there,
Descending suddenly, and poured these words out:
“My son, who more than my own life I cherished,
While I still lived: How Troy’s fate tortures you!
704–­Nautes: An ancestor of the elite
Roman family the Nautii.

695

700

705

710

715

720

725

704–­Tritonian Athena: Minerva was
born near the African lake Triton.

. 133 .

BOOK 5
Jove sent me—it was Jove who drove the fire
From your ships. The high god pities you at last.
Take Nautes’ good advice—his age and wisdom
Support it. Choose the staunchest men to voyage
To Italy. The race you must defeat there
Is tough and hardy. First, though, you must enter
The house of Dis below, cross deep Avernus,
And meet me—not in Tartarus’ cruel prison:
Lovely Elysium is now my home,
Where guiltless souls convene. Kill many black sheep,
To earn the virgin Sibyl as a guide
To where you’ll see your city and descendants.
Good-­bye. The dewy Night is at her turning.
Ah, the fierce breath of Dawn’s pursuing horses!”
He disappeared, like thin smoke in the air.
“Where have you gone so fast?” Aeneas cried,
“Who do you fear? Who keeps us from embracing?”
He roused the dozing fire, offered Troy’s
Home god and white-­haired Vesta in her shrine
Ritual flour and burned his store of incense.
He quickly called Acestes, then his comrades,
And told what Jove enjoined, what his dear father
Counseled, and what he now himself resolved.
Acestes, with no pause for talk, complied.
The matrons were enrolled, the city settled
With volunteers who had no urge for glory.
Crews small in number but alive with valor
Mended the benches and replaced the wood
The flames had gnawed. New oars and ropes were fitted.
732–­Dis: God of the Underworld.
732–­Avernus: Both the wood at the
entrance of the Underworld and, broadly,
the Underworld itself.
733–­
Tartarus’ cruel prison: The
Underworld’s area of punishment.

730

735

740

745

750

734–­Elysium: The realm of the
blessed.
736–­Sibyl: The Sibyl of Cumae.
744–­Home god . . . Vesta: Here, the
Lar (singular of Lares); and the female
god of the hearth.

. 134 .

BOOK 5
Aeneas plowed out borders, made allotments,
Named the town Ilium, the country Troy.
Trojan Acestes, pleased to rule, ordained
A forum and made rules for his new senate.
A shrine was laid out for Idalian Venus
On Eryx’ height. Anchises’ tomb was given
A spacious sacred grove, a priest appointed.
Now the whole tribe had sacrificed and feasted
For nine days. Peaceful winds smoothed out the sea:
The South Wind rose and called them toward the deep.
Along the winding shore rose noisy weeping.
All day, all night they clung in tight embraces.
Even the mothers, even those disgusted
At the word sea and at the sight of it,
Were keen for all the suffering of exile,
Kindly Aeneas soothed his friends. He wept,
Trusting them to Acestes, his relation.
He ordered three calves sacrificed to Eryx,
And to the Storms one lamb, before unmooring.
He wore an olive wreath and stood apart
In the prow to hold the bowl and pour clear wine
And offer entrails to the salty waves.
A following wind surged up against the stern.
Eager crews beat the sea and skimmed above it.
But meanwhile Venus, in her anguished worry,
Poured out these passionate complaints to Neptune:
“Juno’s hard anger and her ruthless heart
Force me to make humiliating pleas.
She yields to neither time nor loving duty.
757–58–­ordained a forum and made
rules for his new senate: Vergil uses Roman terminology.
759–­Idalian Venus: Idalia, on the
island of Cyprus, was a sanctuary of
Venus.

755

760

765

770

775

780

773–­Storms: This personification reflects the essentially animistic beliefs of
the Romans.

. 135 .

BOOK 5
Fate and Jove’s orders cannot break or halt her.
It didn’t satisfy her vicious hatred
To tear Troy from its people and devour it,
Or drag the bones and ashes of the city
Through all this—she must know why she’s so livid.
A while ago, you saw the towering storm
She raised off Africa. Through Aeolus’ whirlwinds,
She merged the world’s seas with the sky, brash meddling
In your domain—for nothing!
And see how wickedly she drove the mothers
Of Troy to burn the fleet, like criminals,
To strand the Trojans where they shouldn’t be.
Let the remainder spread their sails in safety
And cross to reach the Tiber at Laurentum—
If this can be, if the fates grant a city.”
Saturn’s son, tamer of the deep sea, spoke:
“Lady of Cythera, you rightly trust
My realm, where you were born, and I’ve been steadfast,
Crushing great rages of the sea and sky.
Even on dry land I protect Aeneas—
I call to witness Simoïs and Xanthus:
Achilles drove the panicked Trojan ranks
Against the walls. The river groaned with thousands
Of corpses—Xanthus couldn’t reach the sea.
Peleus’ son, for his part, had fierce strength
And gods’ help. In a saving cloud I hid
Aeneas, though I longed to ruin Troy:
I built it, but it broke its promises.
Don’t be afraid—I feel the same as then.
He’ll reach your chosen port beside Avernus.

797–­Laurentum: A city in Italy;
Aeneas will found the city of Lavinium
nearby.
799–­Saturn’s son: Neptune.

785

790

795

800

805

810

800–­Lady of Cythera: Venus.
808–10–­
Peleus’ son . . . Aeneas:
Achilles fought Aeneas until Aeneas was
rescued by his mother (Iliad 20).

. 136 .

BOOK 5
The sea will take just one for him to grieve for,
A single life for many.”
The patriarch had cheered and comforted
The goddess. Now he yoked his team in gold,
Bitted their foaming mouths, and gave them rein.
In his blue chariot he skimmed the sea.
Beneath the rumbling axle swelling waves
Spread even, and the savage clouds dispersed.
His suite, in all its forms, came with him: monsters,
Glaucus’ old troop, Palaemon son of Ino,
Tritons, swift Phorcus’ ranks, and on the left
Thetis, young Panopea, Melite, Spio,
Nesaeë, Thalia, and Cymodoce.
Sweet joy now overwhelmed the anxious thoughts
Of Father Aeneas, who had all the masts
Raised quickly and the yardarms draped with sails.
The crew lined up to set the sheets, released
The folds, first left, then right, and then maneuvered
The yards, and now a good breeze took the fleet,
And Palinurus led that crowded column:
The others were to set their course by him.
The dewy night was near its turning point
Above. The sailors sprawled, relaxed and peaceful,
Under the oars and on the rigid benches,
When Sleep slipped gently down from starry heaven,
Parting the dusky air and strewing shadows,
To bring grim dreams to guiltless Palinurus.
High on the stern Sleep sat, disguised as Phorbas,
And let these words come flowing from his mouth:
“Iasus’ son, the sea itself transports us.
The wind breathes evenly; it’s time to rest.
Lay down your head, steal shut your weary eyes,

841–­Phorbas: A fellow Trojan.

. 137 .

815

820

825

830

835

840

845

BOOK 5
And I myself will see your tasks are done.”
But Palinurus scarcely raised a glance.
“You’re telling me to trust the sea’s calm face
And peaceful waves? I know that it’s a monster.
It’s fooled me many times—should I entrust
Aeneas to the double-­dealing winds?”
He spoke, and gripped the helm, and wouldn’t yield it,
Unwavering in gazing at the stars.
But the god shook a branch, which dripped with dew
Of Lethe and the lulling power of Styx,
Over his temples, forced his swimming eyes shut.
The stealthy doze sank in, and he relaxed.
Sleep bent to pitch him, with the shattered helm
He clung to and its rudder, into clear waves.
His comrades didn’t hear the cries he gave.
Winged Sleep rose through the insubstantial air.
The fleet ran on in safety, undisturbed
And free of fear, as Father Neptune promised.
But now it drifted toward the Sirens’ cliffs—
A menace once, once white with heaps of bones—
From which rock-­pounding water sounded far off.
Father Aeneas felt the ship was drifting
Without its guide. He steered it through the night waves
Himself, with groans of anguish for his friend:
“Oh, trusting victim of calm sea and sky,
Unburied on some strange shore, Palinurus!”

855–­Lethe and the lulling power of
Styx: Two rivers in the Underworld;
Lethe was the river of forgetfulness.
864–­Sirens: Mythological singers,

850

855

860

865

870

part bird and part woman, who lure
ships to ruin, depicted tempting Odysseus in Odyssey 12.

. 138 .

BOOK 6

He spoke in tears, and gave the fleet free rein.
At length they landed at Euboean Cumae.
Their anchors, biting in, secured the ships
Prows seaward, while the curved sterns hemmed the beach.
A band of young men leaped out eagerly
On the Hesperian shore. Some searched for seeds
Of flame in veins of flint, some sacked the dense woods,
Home of wild beasts, and brought reports of rivers.
Steadfast Aeneas sought Apollo’s stronghold
And the huge cave behind it on that height.
There Delos’ prophet breathed into the Sibyl
His mighty will, to show the things to come.
Hecate’s grove, her gold house, arched above them.
Daedalus, in the story, fled King Minos,
Venturing to the sky on speedy wings.
By a new route, he swam into the cold North,
And hung at last above the heights at Cumae.
This land first took him in. He offered Phoebus
His wings—like oars—and then a giant temple,

2–­Euboean Cumae:–­Cumae, near
Naples, was founded by Greeks from
Euboea.
6–­Hesperian: Italian.
11–­Delos’ prophet . . . Sibyl: The
Sibyl will be possessed by Apollo, called
Delian after the island of Delos, his
birthplace.

5

10

15

13–­Hecate: The goddess of witchcraft, often identified with Diana.
14–­Daedalus . . . Minos: The famous
Athenian inventor, imprisoned on Crete
by King Minos. He escaped by creating
wings for himself and his son Icarus.

. 139 .

BOOK 6
Androgeus’ death carved on the door, with Athens
Paying—how pitiful—her yearly fine,
Seven sons’ lives. The urn is there, the lots drawn.
Behind the scene, Crete looms above the sea:
Brutal lust for the bull; Pasiphaë,
His mate by stealth; their human-­bovine offspring,
The Minotaur, crazed passion’s monument;
The hopeless, wearying maze beneath the palace.
But pitying the deep love of the princess,
Daedalus solved his own entrapping riddle:
A thread would guide the lost. You, Icarus,
But for your father’s grief, would figure large
In that great artwork. Twice his hands failed, trying
To show your fall in gold. Now, with Achates
Gone in, the Trojans would have scanned each image;
He soon returned, though, with Deïphobe,
Glaucus’ child, Phoebus and Diana’s priestess,
Who told the king, “This is no time for gawking.
Come, offer seven heifers from a wild herd,
And seven ewes as well, correctly chosen.”
The Trojans quickly carried out her orders.
She called them in then, to the soaring temple.
A cave cuts deeply through the cliff at Cumae.
A hundred mouths, a hundred apertures
Disgorge the swarming answers of the Sibyl.
“It’s time,” the virgin shouted at the threshold,
“To ask what fate will bring you! Look, the god!”
20–26–­Androgeus’ death . . . Mino­
taur: After mating with a bull, Queen
Pasiphaë bore the Minotaur, half-­
bull
and half-­man, which Daedalus contained
in the labyrinth. After the Athenians
murdered Androgeus, Pasiphaë’s human
son by King Minos, Athens was forced
to offer seven youths as a sacrifice to the

20

25

30

35

40

45

Minotaur annually until it was slain by
Theseus, guided by the Cretan princess
Ariadne, who had fallen in love with him.
30–­Icarus: Daedalus’ son who
drowned after flying too close to the sun,
which melted the wax of the wings his
father created.
35–­Deïphobe: The name of the Sibyl.

. 140 .

BOOK 6
Just as she spoke before the doors, her color
Changed, face contorted, hair blew wild, she panted.
Her heart was frenzied, and she seemed to tower
And echo the god’s voice, since he was near,
“Trojan Aeneas, are your prayers and vows
So feeble? Only words of thunder stun
These great gates open.” Silence—as a chill
And tremor skittered through the Trojans’ hard bones.
From deep within his heart, their leader pleaded,
“Phoebus, you always pitied Trojan anguish.
You guided Paris’ hand and arrow, piercing
The son of Aeacus, and you have led me
On a bold voyage between the continents,
Clear to Massylian land, along the Syrtes.
At last we clutch elusive Italy.
Troy’s fortunes must not dog us any farther.
All of you, gods and goddesses, who balked
At Ilium, the splendor of our reign,
Can spare us now, at heaven’s will; and you,
Most holy seer, since I only seek
The realm fate owes me, let the Trojans settle
In Latium with their wandering harried gods.
I will decree a marble shrine for Phoebus
And for Diana of the Crossroads. Feast days
Will have Apollo’s name. For you, my kind guide,
I’ll raise a great shrine in my land and put there

57–58–­
Paris’ hand and arrow,
piercing the son of Aeacus: Paris shot
Achilles, actually the grandson of Aeacus,
in the heel.
60–­Massylian land . . . Syrtes: A
reference to Aeneas’ stay in Carthage;
Aeneas credits Apollo with guiding
their entire journey thus far, from Troy
through Carthage.

50

55

60

65

70

69–­
a marble shrine for Phoebus:
Aeneas’ temple is not mentioned again,
but Augustus will dedicate a shrine on
the Palatine to Apollo, his patron god, in
28 BCE: see 8.720–21n.
70–­Diana of the Crossroads: Diana
Trivia, or “three ways,” who had dominion over Y-­shaped or three-­way roads.

. 141 .

BOOK 6
Your lots and secret forecasts for my people,
And appoint priests. But do not trust your verses
To leaves that gusts can play with and confuse.
Chant them yourself, please.” There he finished speaking.
Inside, the priestess ran amok, resisting
Phoebus and trying hard to shake that great god
Out of her soul. He drove her harder, twisted
Her face and curbed her heart, pinioning, shaping.
The hundred huge doors, on their own, broke open
And poured outside the answers of the prophet:
“Your perils on the seas are finally over,
Though worse will come on land. But be assured:
The Trojans will arrive. Lavinium’s land, though,
Will make them wish they hadn’t. I see war,
Grisly war, and the Tiber frothing blood.
You’ll have another Simoïs and Xanthus,
A Greek camp, and a Latin-­born Achilles,
Himself a goddess’ son. Juno will cling
To hounding you, while on your knees you plead
With every town and tribe in Italy.
Again a foreign love, an alien marriage
Will bring the Teucrians ruin.
Do not give in, but where your fortune lets you,
Go on more bravely still. The path to safety—
Yes, it is true—will open through a Greek town.”
The Sibyl in her shrine at Cumae chanted.
Her fearsome, truth-­entangling riddles boomed
Out of the cave. Apollo lashed his reins
74–75–­verses to leaves: The Sibyl’s
oracular responses were written on oak
leaves.
85–­Lavinium’s land: The realm of
King Latinus in Italy.
87–­Tiber frothing blood: This phrase
was made infamous by the British politi-

75

80

85

90

95

100

cian Enoch Powell in his 1968 “Rivers of
Blood” speech opposing immigration.
97–­
a Greek town: Pallanteum,
founded by the Greek Evander sometime
during the Trojan War. Aeneas will visit
there in book 8.

. 142 .

BOOK 6
Against her, drove his goads into her heart.
But then her frenzy lulled, her rabid mouth
Grew quiet, and the hero spoke. “Pure virgin!
No unfamiliar form of hardship threatens:
My soul has grasped and probed all this. But grant
One thing. The king below and Acheron’s
Welling dark swamp, they say, are through this doorway.
Let me come see my father, face to face.
Tell me the way, open the holy gates.
From fire and a thousand hostile spears,
From the enemies’ midst I saved him, on these shoulders.
He was my comrade over all the seas,
Enduring every threat of sky and ocean;
His weak old age deserved another fate.
He begged me, trusted me to come implore you
Here at your door. Pity the son, the father.
Your kindness has this power: Hecate
Put in your charge the forest of Avernus.
If Orpheus, with sweet notes on a lyre
From Thrace, could call his wife back, and if Pollux
Could buy his brother’s life, and they exchange
The journey back and forth—and Hercules?
Great Theseus? I’m kindred, too, of Jove

106–­the king below: The god Pluto
or Dis, king of the Underworld.
108–­my father: Anchises, who died
at the end of book 3.
119–20–­Orpheus . . . his wife: The
Underworld journey (Greek katabasis)
is a common undertaking for legendary heroes. Orpheus descended into the
Underworld to resurrect his wife, Eurydice, but lost her again because he looked
back as they emerged, against Pluto’s
orders.

105

110

115

120

120–21–­Pollux could buy his broth­
er’s life: Pollux and Castor were twins,
but only Pollux was immortal. They
“shared” death by taking turns in the
Underworld.
122–23–­Hercules . . . Theseus: Hercules went to the Underworld to kidnap
the three-­headed dog Cerberus, Theseus
to help his companion Pirithoüs try to
abduct the queen, Proserpina.

. 143 .

BOOK 6
On high.” So he implored, and clutched the altar.
The seer began: “Sowed from the gods’ blood, Trojan
Anchises’ son! The road down to Avernus
Is easy. Black Dis’ door gapes night and day.
The toil, the struggle is to walk back up
Into the open air. A few could: godborn;
Those Jove loved justly; those whose burning valor
Raised them to heaven. Forests fill the center;
Cocytus flows in black curves all around.
If you’re in love with floating twice on pools
Of Styx, and hot to see black Tartarus
Twice, if your whim is plunging in this mad task,
Hear what to do first. In dense foliage hides
A pliant gold-­leafed branch that’s dedicated
To Juno of the Underworld. The whole woods,
The dim and shady valley shelter it.
Whoever comes within earth’s hidden places
Must first pluck off the tree its gold-­haired offspring.
Lovely Proserpina appointed this
Her offering. Another will replace it,
And other leaves of gold grow from its stem.
Search for it high up; when you’ve duly found it,
Pluck it. It should fall gladly in your hand
If fate has summoned you. If not, your whole strength
Will fail—you couldn’t tear it off with hard steel.
But—you don’t know—a friend lies dead, defiling
132–­Cocytus: A river in the Underworld.
137–­gold-­leafed branch: The “golden
bough,” which was Aeneas’ passport to
the Underworld; this episode provided
Sir James Frazer with the title of his famous and influential 1890 anthropological study.

125

130

135

140

145

142–­Proserpina: Daughter of Ceres,
wife of Pluto, queen of the Underworld.
149–­
a friend lies dead: Misenus,
the trumpeter who signaled the attack
against the Harpies (3.239–40), whose
death is described below.

. 144 .

BOOK 6
The whole fleet with his corpse, while in my doorway
You dawdle, asking for my prophecies.
First lay him in a tomb, his proper home,
And kill black sheep, the first appeasing rite;
Then only will you see the Stygian groves,
The land that’s closed to life.” Her lips shut, silent.
Aeneas, grim-­faced, eyes fixed on the ground,
Walked from the cave and in his mind turned over
What the descent might bring. Faithful Achates,
In stride with him, shared his anxieties.
They spoke in trust and spent a long time guessing
Which man had died, and waited to be buried.
But when they reached the arid shore again,
They saw Misenus dead—he hadn’t earned it.
No one was better skilled than Aeolus’ son
At kindling valor with a bronze horn’s song.
He’d gone to battle in great Hector’s cohort.
You knew him by his trumpet and his spear.
But when Achilles won, and Hector’s life
Became his plunder, brave Misenus followed
Aeneas, just as great a Trojan leader.
Yet then, the fool, he blared a hollow conch shell
Over the sea and challenged gods at music.
Triton, who envied him—or that’s the story—
Caught him among foam-­pouring rocks and drowned him.
So howls of mourning rang from all his comrades,
Especially good Aeneas. Then they hurried,
In tears, to raise the altar of a tomb,
Heaping wood skyward, as the Sibyl ordered.
They strode into the old woods, deep beast shelter.

173–­Triton: A sea god.

. 145 .

150

155

160

165

170

175

BOOK 6
Pines toppled, holm oaks echoed to the ax.
Wedges split beams of ash and fissile oak,
And giant mountain ash rolled down the slope.
Aeneas, with the same tools as the others,
Set an example, urged the workers on.
Scanning the vast woods, pondering his tasks
In his sad heart, he happened to be pleading:
“What if that gold branch were revealed to me
In this huge woods, since everything is true
The seer said of you, Misenus—too true.”
He’d scarcely finished when two doves came flying
Out of the sky to pass before his eyes,
And landed on the grass. The matchless hero,
Knowing his mother’s birds, now prayed with joy:
“Guide me, if there’s a way; direct your flight
Into the grove where that rich bough is shading
The fertile ground. And you, immortal mother,
Be with me in this trial.” He checked his steps
To see what signs the birds gave, where they flew.
Browsing, they fluttered just the length ahead
That kept them in the sight of their pursuer.
But when they reached Avernus’ reeking throat,
They shot up, then soared down through limpid air,
Then perched on what Aeneas sought, the contrast
Of flashing gold among the tree’s green branches;
Just as the mistletoe in dead of winter
Grows a fresh leaf, its own and not its host’s,
And rings the smooth trunk with its yellow shoot,
So the gold leaves stood out against the dark oak.
Their foil was jangling in the gentle wind.

180–82–­
Pines toppled, holm oaks
echoed to the ax . . . down the slope:
Tree-­felling scenes are standard in ancient epics.

180

185

190

195

200

205

190–­two doves: Doves were sacred
to Venus.

. 146 .

BOOK 6
He grasped the clinging branch, wrenched it off keenly,
And took it to the prophet Sibyl’s home.
Back on the beach, the Trojans still were weeping
In last rites for Misenus’ thankless ashes.
They built a massive pyre first, fueled with pitch pine
And oak logs. On the sides they wove dark leaves,
Set funeral cypresses in front, on top
The splendid beauty of his flashing armor.
Some heated pots to make the water swell,
And washed the cold corpse and anointed it.
A groan rose. Now they laid out what they wept for,
Beneath its own familiar purple cloak.
Now some took on that sad task, shouldering
The giant bier, and, in the ancient rite,
Applied the torch. Heaped gifts of food and incense
And bowls of olive oil were burned together.
After the flame died and the ash collapsed,
Wine washed the thirsty cinders. Corynaeus
Gathered the bones and laid them in a bronze jar.
Three times he walked around his comrades, sprinkling
A clear dew from a fertile olive branch
To cleanse them, speaking last words. On the ashes
Reverent Aeneas raised a massive mound,
And placed the hero’s horn and armor there
Beneath a lofty mountain called Misenus
To keep his name alive throughout the ages.
With haste, he now performed the Sibyl’s orders.
There was a cave—monstrously gaping, jagged,
Deep. A dark woods, a black lake sheltered it.
Birds at their peril made their winging way
234–­a lofty mountain called Mise­
nus: The modern Cape Miseno, near
Naples.

. 147 .

210

215

220

225

230

235

BOOK 6
Above, in poison breathing from that black throat
And pouring upward to the dome of heaven.
The Birdless Place is what the Greeks have named it.
First the priest had four young black bullocks brought
To stand there. He poured wine between their horns
And clipped the bristling tufts that stood up highest,
As the first offering for the sacred fire,
And called on Hecate, strong in hell and heaven.
Others applied their knives and caught the warm blood
In bowls. Aeneas slaughtered with his sword
A black-­fleeced lamb for Night, the Furies’ mother,
And Earth, their sister; for Proserpina
A sterile cow; then sacrificed entire bulls
In the night rituals of the Stygian king,
Pouring a rich oil on the burning entrails.
Now, right before the rising sun’s light broke,
The ground beneath their feet roared. Wooded slopes
Shifted. Dogs seemed to howl among the shadows.
The goddess! “Keep away!” the priestess yelled.
“Far away! Leave the grove unless you’re pure!”
But you go forward boldly. Pull your sword free.
It’s now you need your fearless heart, Aeneas.”
Into the open cave she bolted, maddened,
And he kept pace with her, his guide, with brave steps.
You gods who rule dead souls, you silent shades,
And Phlegethon and Chaos, spread with still night,
Give holy sanction, let me pass this tale on
And open what deep earth and darkness cover.
242–­The Birdless Place: the Greek-­
derived name Avernus means “Birdless”;
the lake’s toxic fumes were thought to be
deadly to birds. This line is thought to
be spurious.
243–­black bullocks: Offerings to
chthonic deities are usually black.

240

245

250

255

260

265

253–­the Stygian king: Dis or Pluto.
265–­Phlegethon: A fiery river in the
Underworld.
265– ­Chaos: The primordial void
which existed before the creation of the
universe.

. 148 .

BOOK 6
They walked along, in dark and lonely night,
Through empty shadows and the court of Dis,
As by a stingy moon’s cloud-­crowded glimmer,
A path leads through the woods when Jove has shadowed
The sky, and color hides beneath black night.
Before the entrance hall, the mouth of Orcus,
Sorrow and stinging Guilt have made their beds.
Here are pale Sickness, bleak Old Age, and Fear,
Crime-­urging Hunger, shameful Poverty—
Horrible sights—and Drudgery and Death:
Death’s brother, Sleep, as well; ebullient Evil,
And War, the slaughterer, on the threshold, near
The Furies’ iron rooms; crazed Discord lives there,
Her hair of snakes tied up with bloodstained ribbons.
A huge, dense elm tree in the middle spreads
Its ancient arms. They say this is the roost
Of lying dreams, which cling beneath each leaf.
A great array of monsters has its stables
There at the gates: half-­human Scyllas, Centaurs,
The Lernaean horror-­hissing beast, the hundred
Arms of Briareus, Chimeran flames,
Gorgons and Harpies, Geryon’s ghost with three forms.
Aeneas snatched his sword in sudden terror,
And held it up against the shapes approaching.
Had not his shrewd guide said these flitting things
Were flimsy forms, illusions lacking bodies,
He would have rushed to stab them, to no purpose.
The road leads to the river Acheron:
A whirlpool’s endless chasm seethes with thick mud;
Cocytus drinks the vomit of the sand.

273– ­Orcus: A Roman Underworld
god; his name, like that of other chthonic
deities, can broadly refer to Underworld
itself.

270

275

280

285

290

295

286–89–­Scyllas, Centaurs, . . . Ger­
yon: Various mythological monsters,
some of them featuring in the Labors of
Hercules.

. 149 .

BOOK 6
Guarding these waters is a ghastly boatman,
The squalid, fearsome Charon, with his white beard
In massive snarls, with fixed and fiery eyes,
His dirty cloak hangs from a shoulder knot.
He poles his boat along and sets the sails,
Conveying corpses in his rust-­red vessel.
Old age in him—a god—is fresh and strong.
All of the mob comes pouring to the shore:
Mothers and grown men and the lifeless bodies
Of daring heroes; boys, unmarried girls,
Young men their parents saw placed on the pyre;
As many as the woodland leaves that fall
At the first frost, or birds that flock to land
From the high seas when freezing winter drives them
Across the great gulf into sunny lands.
Ghosts stand and beg to be the first to cross,
Stretching their hands out, yearning for the far shore.
But the grim boatman makes his choice among them
And shoves the rest far back across the beach.
Aeneas, awed and saddened by this chaos,
Asked, “Tell me, why this rush down to the river?
What do these souls want? Why do some retreat
Up the banks, others row the gloomy water?”
The ancient priestess made a brief reply.
“Son of Anchises, heaven’s true child! These
Are the deep-­pooling Cocytus and Styx’ swamp.
Gods swear by it and keep their word, in terror.
This helpless crowd you see has not been buried.
The boatman, Charon there, transports the others.
He cannot bring them past the grisly banks
And roaring stream until their bones find rest.
299–­Charon: The boatman who ferries the souls of the dead across the river
Styx.

. 150 .

300

305

310

315

320

325

BOOK 6
They flit a hundred years around this shore,
Then are let through, home to the pools they long for.”
Anchises’ son now halted in his footsteps,
Brooding in pity on that desolate fate.
He saw there wretched souls deprived of death rites,
Leucaspis and the Lycian fleet’s commander,
Orontes. On the stormy way from Troy
A southern gale engulfed them with their ship.
And there the helmsman Palinurus paces,
Who in mid-­voyage from Africa had fallen
Overboard off the stern while tracking stars.
Aeneas barely recognized his sad form
In so much darkness. “Palinurus! Which god
Tore you from us and plunged you in mid-­ocean?
Tell me! When did Apollo ever cheat me
In prophesying, but about yourself?
He told me you would reach Italian shores
Uninjured. Is this how he keeps his promise?”
He answered, “No, Anchises’ son, my leader,
The oracle was truthful. No god drowned me.
The rudder that I clutched and steered the ship by
Was simply ripped away, and I, its keeper,
Fell, dragging it along. I swear by rough seas,
It was your ship I feared for, robbed of tackle,
Its pilot overboard—not for myself.
Would it now falter under these huge waves?
Three stormy nights a violent South Wind drove me
Over unending sea, and on the fourth day,
From a wave’s crest I just glimpsed Italy.
I struggled on and would have landed safely
Had not a cruel tribe come at me with swords—
Stupid: I was no prize. Weighed down by wet clothes,
334–Leucaspis: Otherwise unknown.

330

335

340

345

350

355

360

335– ­Orontes: A Trojan who died in
the storm at 1.114–16.

. 151 .

BOOK 6
I clutched the jagged cliff top where I landed.
The windy breakers hold me, roll me now.
I beg you by the sky’s sweet light and air,
Your father, and your hopes as Iulus grows,
Save me, unconquered hero. Either sail
To Velia’s port again and bury me
Or, if your deathless mother knows a way
(For I believe the power of gods has brought you
To these great rivers and the Stygian swamp),
Have pity, take my hand, convey me over,
Give me at least a place of peace in death.”
These were his pleas; the prophetess retorted:
“This wish of yours is monstrous, Palinurus—
To see cold-­blooded Styx, the Furies’ river,
To go down there, unburied and unsummoned?
Don’t try to plead away the gods’ decrees.
But hear and keep this comfort for your hard fate.
The cities all around your tomb, obeying
Signs from the high gods, will appease your bones.
They’ll raise a tomb and give it sacrifices;
The land there will be named for you forever.”
This eased the anguish of his heart a short time:
A place named after him—it made him glad.
They pressed ahead from there and neared the river.
But now from streaming Styx the boatman saw them
Walk through the quiet woods and toward the bank.
He was the first to speak, with this rebuke:
“Who are you, marching down here with your weapons?
Stay where you are, and quick, explain yourself.
This is the place of ghosts, sleep, drowsy night:
This boat of Styx may not take living bodies.
To my regret, I shipped great Hercules
366–­Velia’s port: The city Elea.
381–­The land there will be named

365

370

375

380

385

390

for you forever: Cape Palinuro, near Elea
on the southwestern coast of Italy.

. 152 .

BOOK 6
Across the lake, and Theseus with his comrade
Pirithoüs, unconquered sons of gods.
The first one came to chain the guardian hell hound,
And dragged him trembling from beneath the king’s throne;
The others tried to take our lady captive—
From Dis’ bed!” But Apollo’s seer spoke briefly:
“Don’t be afraid—we have no plotting purpose;
These arms are peaceful. For all time, that huge guard
May turn ghosts pale by baying in his cave,
The girl stay in her uncle’s house, unsullied.
Renowned Aeneas, upright, fierce in battle,
Goes to the shades below to find his father.
The sight of such devotion doesn’t move you?
You know this, then”—the branch, which she drew out
From her clothes’ folds. His swelling rage subsided,
And neither spoke. The hallowed gift amazed him,
The branch of fate—so long since he had seen it!
He turned the dark ship to approach the bank,
Shoved the souls from their seats along the benches,
And cleared the gangways. Towering Aeneas
Boarded the hollow leather boat. Its stitching
Groaned at his weight, the swamp poured through the gaps.
But the barge set the prophetess and hero
Safe on the muck, among gray reeds, at last.
Cerberus sprawled immense there in his cave.
The baying of his three throats filled that kingdom.
The snakes rose on his neck, but then the seer
Threw him a cake of drug-­soaked grain and honey.
With his three gaping mouths, in savage hunger,
He seized it, and his monstrous arch of spine
Melted, to stretch his huge form through the grotto.
393–94 Theseus with his comrade
Pirithoüs: see 6.122–23n.

395

400

405

410

415

420

395–­the guardian hell hound: Cerberus.
397–­our lady: Proserpina.

. 153 .

BOOK 6
Aeneas passed the guard, now sunk in sleep,
And hurried from the hopeless river’s banks.
Now a loud howling struck them from the spirits
Of babies: they were crying at the entrance.
They had no share in sweet life. At the breast,
An early death—black day—had swallowed them.
Next were those executed on false charges.
Jurors, assigned by lot, appoint the homes here.
Minos the judge draws names for voiceless panels
And hears what every life now stands accused of.
Beyond this, dismal suicides are lodged.
Though innocent, they threw away their breath
In hatred of the light. But now they’d cherish
Hardships and poverty beneath the sky!
Divine law and the hateful grim swamp trap them.
Around them Styx, with its nine loops, is tied.
She pointed out the nearby Fields of Mourning—
This is their name—that stretch in all directions.
There hidden tracks, bordered by myrtle trees,
Shelter the victims of cruel, wasting love.
Even in death their passions do not leave them.
Phaedra was here, Procris, and Eriphyle
(Who sadly showed the wounds from her cruel child),
Pasiphaë, Evadne; Laodamia
432–­Minos the judge: The first king
of Crete, who after death became a judge
in the Underworld.
440–­Fields of Mourning: An area
filled with spurned lovers, many of
whom had come to violent ends.
445:–­Phaedra: The wife of Theseus,
she committed suicide due to unrequited
love for her stepson, Hippolytus.
445:–­Procris: She was killed by her
husband, Cephalus, in a hunting accident.

425

430

435

440

445

445–­Eriphyle: She was bribed to
betray her husband, Amphiaraus, and
killed as punishment by her son.
447–­Evadne: She threw herself on
the funeral pyre of her husband, Capaneus.
447–­Laodamia: She committed suicide after the death of her husband, Protesilaus, the first Greek to die at Troy.

. 154 .

BOOK 6
And Caeneus, once a young man, now a woman—
Since fate had changed her back—walked by their sides.
Phoenician Dido wandered in that broad wood,
Her wound still fresh; and when the Trojan hero
Encountered her and recognized her dim form
Through shadows, as a person sees the new moon
Through clouds—or thinks he sees it—as it rises,
He wept and spoke to her in tender love:
“Poor Dido, then the messenger was right—
Your own hand held the blade that brought your death?
And it was my fault? By the stars, the high gods,
And any truth below the earth: my queen,
It was against my will I left your country,
And by the orders of the gods, who now
Ordain my journey through this shadowed squalor,
These depths of night. I couldn’t have believed
That I would bring such pain by my departure.
Stay here—don’t back away, but let me see you.
Who are you running from? Fate gives this last chance
To speak to you.” She only glared in fury
While he was pleading, while he called up tears.
Her eyes stayed on the ground, her face averted,
As changeless in expression, while he spoke,
As granite or a jagged marble outcrop.
At last she darted bitterly away
To the dark forest, where her spouse, Sychaeus,
Felt for her sorrow and returned her love.
Aeneas, no less shaken by her hard fate,
Followed her with a tearful gaze of pity.
On the appointed path he struggled forward.
They reached the famous warriors’ distant fields.
448– ­Caeneus: A woman who was
transformed into a man after her rape by
Neptune; Caeneus was eventually killed

450

455

460

465

470

475

by Centaurs and reverted to female form
in the afterlife.

. 155 .

BOOK 6
Tydeus met them, and Parthenopaeus,
Splendid in warfare, and Adrastus’ pale form.
Here were slain Trojans, wept for terribly
Above. Aeneas groaned at long ranks: Glaucus,
Medon, Thersilochus, Antenor’s three sons,
Ceres’ priest Polyboetes, and Idaeus
Still clinging to his arms and chariot.
The souls were crowding at his right and left.
Not happy with one look, they held him back,
To walk with him and learn why he had come.
But the Greek lords and Agamemnon’s cohorts
Were terrified to see the hero’s weapons
Flash through the shadows; some were turning, running,
As once they’d scampered to their ships, some squeaking—
Their open mouths were thwarted: no shouts came.
He saw Deïphobus, the son of Priam,
All mangled, with cruel slashes on his face
And both his hands, his ears stripped from his head,
His nose grotesquely lopped. He shrank back, trying
To hide these awful wounds. Aeneas hardly
Recognized him, but kinship made him speak:
“Great warrior, from the noble blood of Teucer,
By whose cruel choice did such afflictions come?
Who had such power over you? They told me
You’d used your strength up killing Greeks that last night
And fallen on a heap of muddled carnage.
On the Troad’s shore I raised an empty tomb,
Sent three shouts to the spirits. There your weapons
And name remain, but friend, I never saw you.

479–80–­Tydeus . . . Parthenopaeus
. . . Adrastus: Three of the Seven Against
Thebes, warriors who besieged the city
of Thebes in the succession struggle between Oedipus’ sons.

480

485

490

495

500

505

494–­Deïphobus: The Trojan husband of Helen after Paris’ death.
505–­Troad: The peninsula in modern
Turkey where Troy was located.

. 156 .

BOOK 6
I couldn’t set you in our country’s earth.”
Priam’s son answered, “You neglected nothing.
You did your duty by my ghost and me.
Fate and the Spartan woman’s fatal sin
Engulfed me in this torment—her memento.
You know how we were duped, and celebrated
That last night? But there’s no forgetting it.
The fatal horse, pregnant with infantry,
Leaped to our citadel, steep Pergamum,
And Helen led around our Trojan women
In a sham Bacchic rite and held a great torch
Herself: our tower signaled to the Greeks.
Anxiety had worn me into dull sleep
In my unlucky bed. A sweet, deep rest,
Peaceful as death, muffled me as I lay there.
Meanwhile my prize wife cleared the house of weapons—
Even the trusted sword beneath my pillow.
She opened up our door to Menelaus—
Hoping, I guess, this favor to her old flame
Would kill the stink of all her crimes before.
I’ll make it brief: they burst in, with Ulysses,
Who’s behind every crime. Gods, pay the Greeks back!
Mine is a reverent tongue that asks this favor!
But come—now you: what brought you here still living?
Were you off course in voyaging, and swept down?
Did gods direct you? What tormenting fortune
Shows you this sunless town, this sea of darkness?”
Aurora’s rosy chariot in the ether
Soared past the zenith while the two were talking.
They might have used up all the time permitted.

511–­the Spartan woman’s fatal sin:
Helen’s leaving her husband, Menelaus,
king of Sparta, to elope with Paris, starting the Trojan War.

. 157 .

510

515

520

525

530

535

516–­Pergamum: The citadel of Troy.
535–­Aurora: Dawn.

BOOK 6
Aeneas’ guide, the Sibyl, curtly warned him:
“Night rushes on, and tears take up the hours.
The road divides here. This branch on the right,
Which stretches to the walls of powerful Dis,
Will take us to Elysium. The left one
Sends culprits to their due in Tartarus.”
“Great priestess, don’t be angry,” said the dead man.
“I’ll take my place again in that dark cohort.
Go on, Troy’s glory. May your fate be better.”
Then he retreated, as he finished speaking.
Aeneas turned, and right there, to his left—
A fortress with three walls beneath a cliff.
A raging stream of flame called Phlegethon,
With crashing, whirling boulders, rings it, facing
Huge gates and columns made of solid steel.
No human strength, no strength of gods at war
Could tear it up. An iron tower soars.
Tisiphone, unsleeping, guards the gates
Day and night, in her hitched-­up bloody robe.
From inside echo savage blows and groans,
The shriek of iron and the drag of chains.
Terror transfixed Aeneas at the din.
“What crimes did they commit? Pure virgin, tell me!
How are they punished? What loud howls are rising!”
“Great Trojan leader,” she replied, “no good man
Enters this wicked place; but Hecate,
When she assigned me these Avernan groves,
Led me around to all the gods’ reprisals.
Here Cretan Rhadamanthus rules, unyielding.
He puts each life on trial, extracts confessions

542–­Elysium: The part of the Underworld reserved for people who have led
virtuous lives.

540

545

550

555

560

565

555–­Tisiphone: Leader of the Furies,
female spirits of revenge.
566–­Rhadamanthus: Formerly a
king of Crete, now judge of the dead.

. 158 .

BOOK 6
Of sins not expiated there above,
Hidden with stupid relish, till too late.
Tisiphone, who’s ready with her whip,
Swoops down for vengeance, aiming vicious snakes
From her left hand, and calls her sisters’ cruel ranks.
Finally, with a grisly scream of hinges,
The holy doors fall open. Do you see
Her form that sits and guards the entranceway?
A fiercer monster lives inside, the Hydra,
With fifty black throats. Tartarus itself
Plunges next—twice as far, beneath the shades,
As a gaze toward Olympus in the aether.
Titans, an ancient earth-­born race, struck down
By lightning long ago, writhe at the bottom.
Aloeus’ giant twins are there—I’ve seen them.
They tried to wrench away the towering sky,
Attack the gods above, dethrone their ruler.
There I saw Salmoneus cruelly punished—
He’d aped Jove’s flames and the Olympian thunder.
Shaking a torch, he drove his chariot
In triumph through Greek nations, through his city
Of Elis, claiming honors of the gods—
Fool: the inimitable thundercloud
Shammed by the sound of hooves that beat on bronze!
Then the almighty father hurled his weapon—
Which was no guttering pine torch—through the clouds

580–­Titans: The gods who preceded
the Olympian gods; children of Earth
and Sky, who, along with the Giants,
rose up against Jupiter and the Olympians and were chained underground as
punishment.
582–­Aloeus’ giant twins: Otus and
Ephialtes, Giants who tried to seize
Diana and Juno to be their wives.

570

575

580

585

590

585–­Salmoneus: A king who attempted to force his subjects to worship
him over Jupiter and was struck down by
Jupiter.
591–­bronze: Salmoneus imitated the
sound of thunder by driving his horses
over a bridge made of bronze.

. 159 .

BOOK 6
And drove him headlong in a monstrous whirlwind.
Tityos, reared by all-­begetting Earth,
Was there to see, stretched over nine whole acres.
A giant vulture with its hooked beak browses
His deathless liver. Through pain-­fertile innards
It burrows, feeds—lives deep inside his torso;
And with no rest, his viscera grow back.
A crag of flint that hangs above two Lapiths,
Ixion and Pirithoüs, seems set
To topple any second. Banquet couches
Rear high, with shining gold posts. Splendid food
Is spread before their eyes. But the chief Fury,
The guest beside them, will not let them touch it.
She leaps up, thrusts her torch at them, and roars.
Souls who while living hated brothers, struck
Their fathers, or wove fraud around dependents;
And those who crouched alone on newfound riches
(The largest crowd), not sharing with their families;
Slaughtered adulterers; and rebel soldiers,
Bold criminals, betrayers of their lords:
Locked up, all wait for sentencing. Don’t query
The kinds of torment Fortune’s plunged them in.
Some roll immense rocks, some are splayed on wheel spokes.
Poor Theseus sits there—he’ll sit forever.

595–­Tityos: A Titan who attempted
to rape Leto, mother of Apollo and Diana.
601–2–­Lapiths, Ixion and Pirithoüs:
The Lapiths Ixion and his son Pirithoüs
attempted to rape Olympian goddesses
(Juno and Proserpina, respectively).
Their punishment (usually associated
with the sinner Tantalus) was to have an
ever unreachable feast set under a menacing crag; elsewhere Ixion’s punishment
was to be whirled on a wheel forever.

595

600

605

610

615

616–­roll immense rocks . . . splayed
on wheel spokes: Previously the punishments of Tartarus were limited to extraordinary sinners; Vergil expands these
punishments to everyday people who
commit social and civic crimes.
617–­Theseus: As punishment for
helping his friend Pirithoüs attempt the
rape of Proserpina, Theseus was fixed
into the rock of the Underworld when he
sat down there.

. 160 .

BOOK 6
Phlegyas in his torture shrieks a warning
To everyone—his voice rings through the shadows:
‘Learn justice from my fate, and fear the gods!’
One sold his country and imposed a tyrant;
One, for a price, made laws and then remade them.
One stormed his daughter’s room—a lawless marriage.
All of them dared great evil and succeeded.
A hundred tongues and mouths, a voice of iron
Wouldn’t allow me to describe the crimes
In all their forms, or list the punishments.”
The ancient priestess of Apollo added,
“Come, hurry on. Finish the task you started.
Faster! I see the walls the Cyclopes
Forged. There’s a gateway underneath the arch
Where we must put our gifts, as we were told to.”
They stepped along the dark route, side by side,
Crossed the gap quickly, and approached the doors.
Aeneas flicked fresh water on his body
And faced the sill, and set the branch there, upright.
Their duty to the goddess done at last,
They came into a glad land: pleasant grounds
In forests of good fortune, blessèd home.
A richer, shimmering air arrays these fields,
Which have their own familiar sun and stars.
Men exercised in grassy fields, competed
In games, or wrestled on the tawny sand.
Some stamped their dancing feet and chanted songs.
And there the Thracian singer, in his long robe,
Played to the beat, through seven intervals,

618–­Phlegyas: He razed a temple of
his father, Apollo.
630–­the Cyclopes: One-­eyed giants;
their large size made them useful builders for the gods.

620

625

630

635

640

645

645–­the Thracian singer: Orpheus,
the famous singer-­hero, who also came
to be associated with the afterlife cult of
Orphism.

. 161 .

BOOK 6
Changing between his ivory pick and fingers.
Here was the ancient dynasty of Teucer,
Handsome, courageous, born in better years:
Ilus, Assaracus, Dardanus, Troy’s founder.
Aeneas gazed at ghostly chariots
Far off, and armor, planted spears, and horses
Grazing untethered. The delight the living
Take in their arms and chariots, the fondness
For pasturing bright beasts survive the tomb.
Aeneas looked from side to side: some heroes
Feasted and sang a joyous hymn of praise
Among sweet laurel stands. Eridanus
Rolled its great waves into the world above.
This group was wounded fighting for their country;
These, while they lived, had been pure priests; these prophets
Were righteous and deserved to speak for Phoebus.
Some had enriched our life with their inventions,
Or left the memory of some great service.
All of them had white bands around their foreheads.
They poured around the Sibyl. She addressed
Musaeus chiefly (all that huge crowd gazed up:
He towered, massive-­shouldered, in the center):
“Tell me, you happy souls, and you, great singer,
Where can we find Anchises, in which quarter?
For him we sailed through Erebus’ wide waters.”
With a few words the hero answered her:
“We have no houses here. Our homes are dim woods,
Stream banks our couches, verdant, flowing meadows
Our settlements. But if you speak your heart’s wish,
Come up this easy path to climb the ridge.”
He stepped ahead and showed the shining plains
648–50–­the ancient dynasty of Teu­
cer . . . Ilus, Assaracus, Dardanus: Ancient founders of Troy.

650

655

660

665

670

675

658–­Eridanus: The river Padus (in
modern times the Po).
667–­Musaeus: A legendary singer.

. 162 .

BOOK 6
That stretched below, but soon they left the high ground.
Father Anchises, in a low green valley,
Devotedly surveyed the souls confined there
Before emerging to the light. He happened
Now to be tallying his dear descendants—
Lives, destinies, achievements, characters—
And when he saw Aeneas making toward him
Over the grass, he stretched his hands out, blissful.
The tears poured down his cheeks, and he exclaimed.
“You’ve come at last? Love would win out, I knew,
On this hard road. And can I see your face,
My child, hear your beloved voice, and answer?
Really, I counted on this, calculated
The time, and anxious hope could not deceive me!
Welcome! How many lands and wide seas sent you,
My son, and on what giant waves of danger!
I feared the Libyan realms would injure you.
Aeneas answered, “Father, your sad image,
Which often meets me, called me to this place.
My ships stand in the Tuscan sea. My hand—
Clasp it and don’t retreat from my embrace.”
The tears poured down his face. Three times he tried
To throw his arms around his father’s neck,
Three times the form slid from his useless hands,
Like weightless wind or dreams that fly away.
The hero now saw, at the valley’s end,
A sheltered woods. Wind murmured in its branches.
The river Lethe drifted past the still homes.
Above the water, souls from countless nations
Flitted, like bees in tranquil summer meadows
Who move from bud to vivid bud and stream
680–­Devotedly surveyed the souls
confined there: Anchises is reviewing
souls prior to their reincarnation, much

680

685

690

695

700

705

as a Roman censor would ceremonially
review Roman citizens.
694–­the Libyan realms: Carthage.

. 163 .

BOOK 6
Around white lilies—all the field whirs loudly.
The unexpected sight enthralled Aeneas.
He wished to learn about it—what the stream was,
And what men filled the banks in that great phalanx.
Father Anchises answered, “These are souls
Fate owes new bodies. Here at Lethe’s water
They drink up long oblivion and peace.
All of this time, I’ve yearned to tell of them
And let you see them, counting my descendants,
To share my joy that you’ve reached Italy.”
“Father, do some souls really soar back skyward
From here, returning into sluggish bodies?
What dreadful longing sends them toward the light?”
“I’ll free you from suspense, my child,” he answered,
And told it all, in detail and in order.
“At first, an inner spirit nurtures earth
And sky, the water’s plains, the moon’s bright globe,
The sun and stars; and mind infuses each part
And animates the mass of all there is.
Thus arise humans, grazing beasts, and creatures
That fly, and monsters in the glittering ocean.
Their seeds have fiery force; these come from heaven.
And yet the noxious body slows them somewhat.
The earthly parts that perish make them numb.
Those parts bring fear, desire, joy, and sorrow.
Souls in dark dungeons cannot see the sky.
When, on the final day, a life departs,
Not every evil sickness of the body
Wholly withdraws from that poor spirit—many
Are long grown in, mysteriously ingrained.
So souls are disciplined and pay the price
734–­souls in dark dungeons: Vergil
incorporates the Orphic idea of the body
as the prison of the soul.

. 164 .

710

715

720

725

730

735

BOOK 6
Of old wrongdoing. Some are splayed, exposed
To hollow winds; a flood submerges some,
Washing out wickedness; fire scorches some pure.
Each bears his own ghost; then a few are sent
To live in broad Elysium’s happy fields,
Till time’s great circle is completed, freeing
The hardened stain so the ethereal mind,
The fire of pure air, is left untainted.
When they have circled through a thousand years,
God calls them all in one long rank to Lethe,
To send them back forgetful to the sky’s vault,
With a desire to go back into bodies.”
Anchises finished, and he drew the two guests
Into the middle of the rumbling crowd.
He climbed a ridge that showed him every man
In the long line. He knew each face approaching.
“Come, hear your destiny, the future glory
Of Dardanus’ long line, all the descendants
We are to have from the Italian race—
Great souls who will be born into our family.
That young man leaning on a headless spear
Will take the next turn in the airy light:
Your posthumous son Silvius (a name
From Alba), first of Troy’s Italian bloodline.
Lavinia will raise him in the forest,
And he will be a king and father kings:
Our family that will reign in Alba Longa.
By him stands Procas, glory of Troy’s race,
Followed by Capys, Numitor, Aeneas

749–­God: Used vaguely.
757–­Dardanus’ long line: The Ro‑
mans claimed ancestry from the Trojans.
764–­Lavinia: Aeneas’ future wife in
Italy, the daughter of King Latinus.

740

745

750

755

760

765

766–­Alba Longa: City believed to
have been founded by Aeneas’s son Ascanius.
767–­Procas: One of the Latin kings
of Alba Longa.

. 165 .

BOOK 6
Silvius, your high-­hearted, blameless namesake—
If ever he succeeds to Alba’s kingship.
What fine young men! You see the strength in them.
Oak leaves of civic honor shade their temples.
They’ll found Nomentum, Gabii, Fidenae,
The fortress of Collatia in the mountains,
Pometii, Castrum Inui, Bola, Cora—
The famous names of places nameless now.
Romulus, Mars’ child, Trojan through his mother,
Will join Mars’ father, by his side above.
You see the twin crests? They’re a special emblem
The father of the gods already gives him.
Under the omens this man saw, renowned Rome
Will rule the world and raise her heart to heaven;
Blessed in her sons, with one wall ringing seven
Citadels: like the tower-­crowned Great Mother,
Driving her chariot through Phrygian cities,
Holding in blissful arms her hundred grandsons
From gods—all gods themselves, who live in heaven.
Now turn your eyes here, see this clan—your Romans:
Caesar, and all of Iulus’ offspring, destined

772–­
Oak leaves of civic honor: A
wreath of oak leaves was presented to
Romans who saved a citizen’s life in
battle.
773–75–­Nomentum . . . Cora: Early
settlements founded from Alba Longa
in the region surrounding Rome, all of
which had lost their importance by Vergil’s day.
777–­
Romulus, Mars’ child: The
war god Mars impregnated a Vestal Virgin called Ilia, a descendant of Assaracus (named in the Latin here; see
6.648–50n.), who bore Rome’s founders,
Romulus and Remus.

770

775

780

785

784–85–­tower-­crowned
Great
Mother . . . Phrygian cities: The mother
goddess Cybele, or Magna Mater, who
wore a crown of turrets and drove a
chariot pulled by lions. Her cult was imported to Rome during the Second Punic
War. Her mention here underlines the
Romans’ descent from the Trojans.
789–­
Caesar . . . Iulus’ offspring:
Probably Augustus, since his adoptive
father, Julius Caesar, is mentioned below
(829–31), but scholars debate this identification.

. 166 .

BOOK 6
To make their way to heaven’s splendid heights.
Here is the god’s son you have often heard
Promised, Augustus Caesar, who will bring
Another age of gold to Saturn’s old realm,
Latium. Past India he’ll take our rule,
Beyond the Garamantes and the sun’s path
That marks the year, where Atlas hefts the sky
And turns the high vault set with burning stars.
The Caspian realm, the land around Maeotis
Already quake at prophecies—he’s coming!
All the Nile’s seven mouths are in confusion.
Hercules didn’t travel through so much land
To pierce the bronze-­hoofed deer or tame the woods
Of Erymanthus, or make Lerna tremble
Under his bow; nor Bacchus, flexing vine reins,
Whom tigers drew in triumph from high Nysa.
Shall we hang back and not exert our courage,
Fearing to stake our claim in Italy?
Who is that, far off, olive-­crowned, and bringing
A sacrifice? White hair, white beard—I know him:
This Roman king will found the new-­built city
On laws. From little Cures with its poor soil

792–94–­
Augustus Caesar . . .
Latium: The reign of Caesar Augustus
(31 BCE–­14 CE) was distinguished as
a period of great civic and economic
prosperity as well as literary achievement. Vergil claims it resembles the first
Golden Age, when the god Saturn ruled
in Latium.
795–­Garamantes: An African people.
798–­The Caspian realm . . . Maeo­
tis: The Caspian Sea and the Sea of Azov.
801–­Hercules: The hero Hercules
had to complete Twelve Labors to atone
for unintentionally killing his family; the

790

795

800

805

810

labors included capturing the Cerynaian
deer, slaying the Erymanthian boar, and
defeating the many-­
headed Lernaean
Hydra.
805–­Nysa: Bacchus, god of wine and
revelry, was believed to have been born
on Mount Nysa in India.
810–11–­This Roman king . . . Cures:
Numa Pompilius, the second king of
Rome, was born in the Sabine town of
Cures. He instituted many of Rome’s
most important religious and political
customs.

. 167 .

BOOK 6
He’ll rise to great dominion. But that next one,
Tullus, will break the country’s peace and rouse
Its men, who’ve grown unused to victories.
Next is the boaster Ancus, even now
Drunk on the breezes of the people’s favor.
Now shall I show you Tarquin kings and Brutus,
The proud avenger, winning back the fasces—
First consul, with that office’s harsh axes?
For splendid freedom’s sake he’ll have his own sons
Put to death, when they stir up war again—
Poor man, though ages after him applaud.
Love for his country, greed for praise will triumph.
Torquatus with his savage ax, the Drusi
And Decii, Camillus, who’ll bring home
Our standards. See those two in bright matched armor,
Souls in accord while night imprisons them.
But once they reach the light, how great a war

813–­Tullus: Tullus Hostilius, the
third king of Rome, who conquered Alba
Longa.
815–­Ancus: Ancus Martius, the
fourth king of Rome.
817–18–­Tarquin kings and Brutus,
the proud avenger . . . fasces: Tarquinius Priscus and Tarquinius Superbus
(the Proud), the fifth and seventh kings
of Rome. The rape by Superbus’ son of
the Roman noblewoman Lucretia caused
Lucius Junius Brutus and Lucius Tarquinius Collatinus to drive out the kings in
510 BCE; they became the first Roman
consuls and shifted Rome from a monarchy to a republic, symbolized by the
fasces, a bundle of wooden rods and an
ax bound together (the word fascism is
derived from this). Brutus the assassin
of Julius Caesar was Lucius’ descendant.

815

820

825

824–­Torquatus: Manlius Torquatus,
a Roman general from the fourth century
BCE who executed his son for abandoning his military post.
824–­the Drusi: The most famous
Drusi were Augustus’s wife, Livia, and
her son by a previous marriage, the
future emperor Tiberius.
825–­Decii: A Roman plebeian family,
most famous for a father and son who
ritually sacrificed themselves in battle
(Latin devotio) for the salvation of Rome
in 340 and 295 BCE, respectively.
825–­Camillus: A soldier and statesman known for being imprisoned by
invading Gauls and recovering Roman
battle standards from the enemy, which
invites recollection of Octavian’s recovery
of military standards previously lost to
the Parthians.

. 168 .

BOOK 6
They’ll rouse, what ranks of death, father-­in-­law
Come down the bouldered Alps from high Monoecus,
And son-­in-­law deploying all the East.
Children, don’t lose your horror of such warfare.
Don’t turn your massive strength against your country.
You of the gods’ stock: take the lead, have mercy!
My son, throw down your weapons!
Mummius—there!—in triumph over Corinth’s
Slain Greeks will ride up to the Capitol;
Paullus will root out Agamemnon’s town
And Argos: Perseus, Achilles’ heir,
Will pay for Troy and Pallas’ sullied shrine.
Great Cato, Cossus, who could pass you over?
Gracchus’ sons?—Scipios, the twin war-­lightning
Fellers of Libya?—or that resourceful
829–31–­father-­in-­law . . . son-­in-­
law: A reference to the Roman civil
war between Julius Caesar and Pompey
the Great, who was married to Caesar’s
daughter Julia until her death in childbirth. After successful military campaigns
in Gaul, in 49 BCE Caesar marched his
troops through the Alps and into Roman
territory; this was seen as an act of war
by the Senate, which ordered Pompey
to defend the state. The ensuing conflict
ended in Caesar’s solidification of power
and Rome’s permanent shift from republic to empire.
836–­Mummius: Lucius Mummius,
who in 146 BCE sacked the city of Cor­
inth and made Greece part of Rome’s territories.
838–39–­Paullus . . . Agamemnon’s
town . . . Argos: Lucius Aemilius Paullus conquered Perseus, king of Macedon,
in the battle of Pydna in 171 BCE. Agamemnon’s town was Mycenae. “Argos” is
often used to denote the same part of the
Peloponnese.

830

835

840

840–­Pallas’ sullied shrine: A reference to the rape of Cassandra in Minerva’s
shrine (2.403–6) and perhaps also to the
theft of the Palladium (2.162–68).
841–­Great Cato: Cato the Elder, who
ended every speech by urging the destruction of Carthage.
841– ­Cossus: A Roman general famous for killing the king of Veii in single
armed combat in 428 BCE and so earning
the “Rich Spoils” (spolia opima), which
were awarded only three times in Roman
history. See 6.855–57n.
842– ­Gracchus’ sons: The Gracchi
brothers, Tiberius and Gaius, who advocated the redistribution of land to veterans and the poor and were assassinated
by the Roman elite.
842–43–­
Scipios . . . Libya: Probably Publius Scipio Africanus and Scipio
Aemilianus, who defeated the Carthaginian general Hannibal in 202 BCE and
sacked the city of Carthage in 146 BCE,
respectively. “Libya” refers obliquely to
Carthage.

. 169 .

BOOK 6
Fabricius, or Serranus, furrow-­sower?
You, Fabii, seize my weary sight: your Greatest
Will be Rome’s sole protector—through his stalling!
Others, I know, will beat out softer-­breathing
Bronze shapes, or draw from marble living faces,
Excel in pleading cases, chart the sky’s paths,
Predict the rising of the constellations.
But Romans, don’t forget that world dominion
Is your great craft: peace, and then peaceful customs;
Sparing the conquered, striking down the haughty.”
They were amazed. Father Anchises added,
“See how Marcellus marches in the glory
Of the Rich Spoils, an over-­towering victor.
This knight will save a Rome in chaos, crushing
Carthage and rebel Gaul; he’ll make our third gift
Of captured rebel arms to Quirinus.”
Aeneas saw a fine youth in bright armor,
Walking beside Marcellus—but his face
Was overcast, his eyes fixed on the ground.

844–­Fabricius: Gaius Fabricius Luscinus, who lost to King Pyrrhus of Epirus in battle; the heavy losses suffered by
Pyrrhus in winning his victory are the
origin of the phrase “Pyrrhic victory.”
844–­Serranus: Nickname of the Roman general Gaius Atilius Regulus, a
hero of the First Punic War.
845–­Fabii . . . your Greatest: One of
the most celebrated of the Fabian clan
was Quintus Fabius Maximus (“the
greatest”) Cunctator (“the delayer”) who
saved the Romans from Hannibal by delaying tactics.
847–­Others: The Greeks, whom Anchises otherwise pays little attention to.
853–­Sparing the conquered, striking
down the haughty: One of the most fa-

845

850

855

860

mous lines in the poem; the end of book
12 raises the question of whether Aeneas
follows his father’s advice.
855–57–­
Marcellus . . . the Rich
Spoils . . . This knight: Marcus Claudius
Marcellus, a Roman general during the
Second Punic War (218–201 BCE) who
had won the spolia opima (“Rich Spoils”)
for only the third time in Roman history,
the first two winners being the legendary
king Romulus and Cossus (see 6.841n.).
859– ­Quirinus:
Romulus,
the
founder of Rome, became identified with
the god Quirinus after his death.
860–­a fine youth: Gaius Claudius
Marcellus, the nephew and heir-­apparent
of Augustus, who was only twenty when
he fell ill and died in 23 BCE.

. 170 .

BOOK 6
“Father, who’s that companion of the hero?
A son perhaps, or grandson of that great stock?
What a fine presence, what great praise around him!
But black night winds sad shadows round his head.”
Father Anchises then began to sob:
“My son, don’t ask about your clan’s great sorrow.
Fate will give just a glimpse of him on earth.
Deities, you decreed the Roman race
Would be too mighty if it kept this gift.
What loud laments from citizens will Mars’ Field
Send up to Mars’ great city! What processions
Will Tiber see when gliding by the new tomb!
No boy of Trojan blood will raise more hope
In Latin forebears. In no other nursling
Will Romulus’ land ever glory more.
Rectitude, old-­time honor, strength unbeaten
In war! Nobody meeting him in battle
Could have escaped him as he came on foot
Or gored a horse’s foam-­flecked side with spurs.
Poor boy—if you could only break this cruel fate!
You’ll be Marcellus. Let me give the gifts
I can: armloads of lilies, purple flowers,
Scattered in empty ritual for the soul
Of my descendant.” Through the airy, broad fields
They wandered now, surveying everything.
Anchises led his son to all the sights,
And fired the lust for glory in the future,
Then told about the wars he soon must fight,
Laurentian tribes, the city of Latinus,
How to endure or else avoid each hardship.

872–­Mars’ Field: The Campus Martius, where Marcellus’ ashes were interred at the mausoleum of Augustus.
890–91–­told about the wars . . . Lau­

865

870

875

880

885

890

rentian tribes, the city of Latinus: Anchises foresees the events of books 7–12,
in which Aeneas will battle the native
Italians, here called Laurentians.

. 171 .

BOOK 6
There are two gates of sleep. The one, they say,
Is horn: true shades go out there easily;
The other—shining, white, well-­crafted ivory—
Lets spirits send false dreams up toward the sky.
His speeches done, Anchises brought his son here,
And sent him with the Sibyl through the ivory.
Aeneas went straight back, to ships and comrades,
Then coasted to the harbor of Caieta.
The prows dropped anchors; sterns stood on the shore.

893–­two gates of sleep: Modeled on
the gates of horn and ivory described by
Odysseus’s wife, Penelope, in Odyssey
19.562–67. Why Aeneas passes through
the Gate of Ivory, the gate of false
dreams, remains a mystery.

895

900

900–­the harbor of Caieta: A port
near the Gulf of Naples, named for
Aeneas’s nurse.

. 172 .

BOOK 7

Aeneas’ old nurse, you as well, Caieta,
In dying gave our shores your lasting fame.
The great West keeps your resting place today
In glory—if there’s glory in the grave.
Loyal Aeneas rendered her due rites,
Heaping a mound up. When the deep sea calmed,
He spread his sails and left the port behind.
The breezes blew past nightfall, and the white moon
Lit up their course; the gleaming surface trembled.
They sailed close by the shore of Circe’s country.
The Sun’s rich daughter makes secluded groves there
Resound with constant singing and, in high halls
At nighttime, by the fragrant cedar’s light
Runs her shrill shuttle through the filmy weave.
In the late hours, growls are heard, and roars
Of lions in hot struggles with their chains,
And raging screams of bristly hogs and bears
In pens, and howls from wolves—those hulking shapes,
Once human: potent herbs from that fierce goddess
Gave them the faces and the fur of beasts.
Saving the blameless Trojans from these grim spells,
From landing in that port on deadly shores,
Neptune sent helping winds to fill their sails,

1– ­Caieta: The promontory, harbor,
and city here were all called Gaeta after
Caieta.
5–­Loyal: Another way of translating
pius.

5

10

15

20

10–­Circe’s country: Aeaea, the island
of the sorceress Circe in the Odyssey, was
associated with modern-­day Monte Circeo on the southwest coast of Italy.

. 173 .

BOOK 7
And they escaped beyond the foaming shallows.
The sea blushed with ethereal beams; Aurora
Showed tawny in her rosy chariot.
The wind abated. Instantly the breezes
All calmed, oars toiled in smooth and sluggish water.
Now from the watery plain Aeneas saw
A broad grove, lovely Tiber bursting through—
Darting with whirlpools, yellow with its sand load—
Seaward. All kinds of river birds and shore birds
Fluttered from branch to branch, around and over
The channel, and their songs caressed the sky.
He told his men to turn the prows toward land,
And gladly started up the shaded river.
Erato, let me tell about the times,
The rulers, and what ancient Latium was
When foreigners first beached their army’s fleet
In Italy, and how the quarrels started.
Goddess, direct your poet. Savage warfare
I’ll sing, and kings whose courage brought them death:
The Tuscan army, all Hesperia rallied
To arms. This is a higher story starting,
A greater work for me.
Latinus, old now,
Had reigned through long peace over towns and farmland.
Faunus and a Laurentian nymph, Marica,

30–­Tiber: The main waterway of
Rome.
37–­Erato: The Muse of love poetry.
The second half of the Aeneid will center
on the battle between Aeneas and Turnus
for Lavinia’s hand.
43–­Tuscan . . . Hesperia: Italy.

25

30

35

40

45

45–­A greater work for me: Vergil announces the start of his Iliadic narrative,
following his Odyssean books 1–6.
45–­Latinus: The king of the Latins
and father of Lavinia.
47–­Faunus: An Italian god of woods
and trees.

. 174 .

BOOK 7
We hear, begot him; Picus, Faunus’ father,
Claimed Saturn as his own, the family’s founder.
By the gods’ will, Latinus had no male child;
Sons born to him were taken in their first youth.
An only daughter, hope of that great house,
Was now grown up and ready for a husband.
From Latium’s breadth, from all of Italy
Men courted her. The handsomest was Turnus,
From a strong dynasty. Latinus’ wife
Was ardent, wild to have this son-­in-­law.
But holy signs, each with its terrors, blocked her.
A laurel, long revered, with sacred foliage,
Stood in the central high-­roofed palace shrine.
Father Latinus found it here while building
The town, they say, and offered it to Phoebus,
And named the settlers after it Laurentians.
Now a loud swarm of rumbling bees—amazing
To speak of—crossed the clear air, seized the treetop.
Quickly they intertwined their feet and hung
Down from a leafy branch in one great mass.
An augur said, “I see a warrior
Come from abroad. A phalanx trails these bees
To the same spot—the new lords in your tower.”
When the king burned pure torches on the altar,
And chaste Lavinia stood by her father,
A blaze—uncanny—seemed to catch her long hair.
And all her rich clothes crackled in the flame.
Her regally bound hair, her crown with bright gems

48–­Picus: The first king of Latium
and a son of Saturn. He was turned into
a woodpecker by Circe.
52–­An only daughter: Lavinia.

50

55

60

65

70

75

55–­Turnus: King of the Rutulians,
Lavinia’s fiancé.
56–­Latinus’ wife: Queen Amata.
64–­rumbling bees: Bees settling in a
bay laurel were considered a bad omen.

. 175 .

BOOK 7
Kindled, and she was wrapped in tawny light
And smoke, and sparks were scattered through the palace—
A wondrous, fearful sight, it was reported.
Prophets foretold a glorious destiny
For her, but for her people mighty conflict.
Anxious, the king approached the oracle
His father, Faunus, spoke through in the grove
The Albunea, king of forests, waters,
Loud with its sacred spring, dark, breathing sulfur.
Here, if perplexed, the tribes of Italy
Seek answers. When a priest has brought his gifts,
He lies on sheepskins from the sacrifices
And goes to sleep beneath the still night sky.
There he sees many eerie fluttering forms,
Hears voices of all kinds, consults with gods,
And speaks to Acheron in Avernan depths.
Father Latinus sought advice in person.
He sacrificed a hundred woolly sheep,
Then lay there resting on their spread-­out fleeces.
Suddenly, from within the grove, a voice:
“My child, shun this alliance for your daughter
With Latins, though a wedding is at hand.
Foreigners will arrive, and intermarriage
Will raise our name to heaven. The descendants
Will bring the earth beneath their feet and rule it
Clear to both oceans that the sun rides over.”
Latinus didn’t keep concealed the warning
83–­Albunea: A spring or wood near
the oracle of Faunus. The waters of Albunea were cloudy with sulfur; hence the
name’s derivation from the Latin word
alba, “white.”
91–­Acheron . . . Avernan depths:
Stand-­ins for the Underworld and its
deities, which often function as sources

80

85

90

95

100

of prophetic wisdom. The real places,
Acheron (in Thesprotia) and Avernus
(in Campania), were treated as oracles
of the dead.
94–­lay there resting: Incubation—
spending the night in a sacred area to receive prophetic dreams—was often practiced at oracles.

. 176 .

BOOK 7
His father, Faunus, gave him in the still night.
Rumor had winged it into all the far towns
Of Italy when Trojan forces moored
Their ships off Tiber’s grassy mounded bank.
Aeneas, his lieutenants, and his fine son
Sprawled on the ground beneath a high tree’s branches,
Prepared a meal, and, at Jove’s prompting, set
Spelt wafers on the grass to hold their food,
A cereal base to pile with woodland forage.
All this was eaten; hunger drove them further,
To gnawing at the sheets of bread. Their hands,
Their bold jaws now assaulted the baked disks,
Broad surfaces that fate had sent to them.
“Look how we eat our tables,” Iulus said—
A joke—but those few words first gave a sign
Of hardship’s end. His father seized on them,
Struck by the miracle, and silenced him,
Then cried at once, “Hail, country pledged by fate!
Hail, faithful guardian gods of Troy as well!
This is your home, your land. Father Anchises
(Now I recall) bequeathed this fateful secret:
‘My child, when on strange shores your food is torn
Away, and hunger makes you eat your tables,
Then trust that home and rest are there. Be mindful,
Lay buildings out and raise defensive walls.’
This is that hunger, waiting till the end
To close our exile off.
So at first light let’s fan out eagerly
From where we’ve landed and explore the country—
What people live here? Where is their walled city?
Pour Jove an offering and send my father
116–­we eat our tables: Fulfilling the
prophecy made by the harpy Celaeno
(3.254–57).

. 177 .

121–­guardian gods: See 1.379n.

105

110

115

120

125

130

BOOK 7
Anchises prayers, and bring more wine for feasting.”
Wearing a verdant chaplet, he beseeched
The place’s spirit and the firstborn goddess,
And Earth, and nymphs and rivers still unknown,
And Night, with all her rising signs, and Jove,
God of Mount Ida, and the Phrygian Mother;
Then his own parents—in the sky, below earth.
Thundering three times, the almighty father
In clear high heaven shook a cloud and made it
Blaze out, conspicuous with rays of gold.
The word spread quickly through the Trojan ranks:
The time had come to build their promised walls.
Ecstatic at that great sign, they renewed
The feasting, placing garlands on the wine bowls.
The new day rose, the great lamp spread its light.
They split up, scouted riverbanks, the city
And borders of the tribe. Here was the Tiber—
Numicus’ pooling spring—brave Latins’ home.
Anchises’ son now chose a hundred legates
Of various ranks and sent them to the king’s
Proud walls. They must put on olive crowns
And take him gifts, peace offerings from Trojans.
They hurried to obey and strode there quickly.
Where walls would rise, Aeneas on the shore
Dug a low ditch and labored at their first home,
With battlements and ramparts, like a camp.
The group now made its journey, saw the high roofs
And towers of Latins, and approached the walls.
139–­Mount Ida: The mountain on
Crete where Jupiter was raised.
139–­Phrygian Mother: Cybele, the
Great Mother, associated with the other
Mount Ida, near Troy; see 3.111n.
140–­
his own parents—in the sky,

135

140

145

150

155

160

below earth: Venus is a goddess; Anchises is now in the Underworld.
151–­
Numicus’ pooling spring: A
river of Latium with mythological connections to Aeneas’ burial and deification.

. 178 .

BOOK 7
There boys and thriving young men drilled on horses,
Or trained their chariot teams on dusty tracks,
Pulled tight-­strung bows, hurled pliant javelins,
Or boxed and raced on foot in competition.
A mounted messenger rushed with his news
To the old king: tall men, in foreign clothes.
He ordered them invited in and sat
In the hall’s center, on his forebears’ throne.
Laurentian Picus’ huge and stately palace
Soared with its hundred columns at the town’s crest,
A wooded site the ancients held in awe.
For the good omen, kings took up their scepters
And rods of office there. It housed the Senate
And sacred banquets; there the elders slaughtered
A ram and sat at tables in a long row.
The forebears’ busts were in the vestibule,
Old cedar faces, Italus, Sabinus,
Planter of vines—his sickle hung beneath him—
The old man Saturn, Janus’ double face,
And all the other kings from the beginning,
With heroes wounded in their country’s wars.
On sacred doorposts many war spoils hung:
Axes with curved blades, chariots in bondage,
With plumes from helmets, giant bolts from gates,
Spearheads and shields, and rams torn out of hulls.
Picus himself, horse-­tamer, sat there, shown
In a short cloak. His right hand held the staff
Of Quirinus, his left the sacred shield.
170–­huge and stately palace: Vergil
makes Picus’ palace a precursor of Rome
with mention of ceremonial rods, a Senate, portrait busts, and spoils of war.
178–­Italus, Sabinus: Eponymous
ancestors of the native Italians and the
Sabines.

165

170

175

180

185

180–­Janus’ double face: Janus is portrayed with two faces, one looking to the
past and the other to the future.
189–­Quirinus: An early Roman god;
Romulus, Rome’s founder, would later
be identified with him: see 6.859n.

. 179 .

BOOK 7
Circe, his lust-­crazed wife, armed with her gold staff
And potions, changed him to a dappled bird.
On his ancestral seat inside this temple,
Latinus called the Teucrians to meet him
And spoke to them serenely when they came:
“Trojans (we know your city and your race;
We heard about you as you sailed this way),
What do you seek? What need has brought your ships here
Through endless blue sea to Italian shores?
If you are lost or swept astray by tempests—
Which many sailors on the deep endure—
And so you broach our river, camp beside
Our port, take refuge here. Be sure that Latins,
Saturn’s race, don’t do right from sheer compulsion
Of law but choose to keep the old god’s ways.
I do remember, though time dims the story,
What old Auruncans said: Born in this country,
Dardanus sailed to Phrygian Ida’s cities
And Thracian Samos, now called Samothrace,
From Corythus, his own Etruscan town.
The starry sky’s gold palace now enthrones him;
He ranks among the gods and has his altars.”
He finished; Ilioneus now answered,
“King, glorious child of Faunus, no black storms,
No roiling billows drove us to your country;
The stars, the coastlines gave us no false guidance.
We all came to your city willingly,
On purpose, exiles from the greatest kingdom—
Once—that the Sun saw, voyaging from the sky’s edge.
190–­Circe . . . wife: Actually would-­
be wife; when Picus spurned her she
turned him into a woodpecker.
206–­old Auruncans: A native Italian
people, also called Ausonians.

190

195

200

205

210

215

207–8–­Dardanus sailed to . . . Samo­
thrace: Samothrace is a Greek island in
the northern Aegean famous for its mystery cult. It is sometimes called Dardania.
212–­Ilioneus: The oldest of the Trojans in Aeneas’ party.

. 180 .

BOOK 7
Jove first begot our race; in this our people
Delight. From Jove’s high race our king was born:
Trojan Aeneas sent us to your doorstep.
How great a storm from pitiless Mycenae
Poured over Trojan fields, when fate brought two worlds,
Europe and Asia, battering together—
The earth’s remotest people, set apart
By Ocean with its tides, or in the brutal
Tropical middle of the five zones, know this.
Out of that deluge, through vast seas we’ve come,
To beg a tiny home here for our gods,
A harmless beach. Water and air cost nothing!
We will not shame your kingdom—no, your good deed
Will bring you lasting gratitude and glory;
Italians won’t regret embracing Trojans.
I swear it by Aeneas’ fate, his strong hand
Proven in all his friendships and his battles:
Many tribes, many nations have sought union
Or treaties with us. We approach you first
With suppliant words and fillets—do not scorn us.
On gods’ prophetic orders we have sought
Your land—once Dardanus’. Mighty Apollo
Summons us back to the Etruscan Tiber
And to Numicus’ sacred pooling waters.
Our leader sends you gifts, which are his remnants
Of wealth, saved from the flames at Troy. His father
Poured wine out on the altars from this gold bowl.
Priam, proclaiming laws to gathered nations,
Held this rod, wore this holy crown, these clothes,
The work of Trojan women.”

219–­Jove first begot our race: A Trojan ancestor, Dardanus, was the son of
Jupiter (Jove) and Electra.
227–­the five zones: According to an-

220

225

230

235

240

245

cient theory the earth was divided into
two temperate habitable zones, two
frigid zones (the Arctic and Antarctic),
and an arid equatorial zone.

. 181 .

BOOK 7
Latinus, stunned by Ilioneus’ words,
Sat there unmoving, gazing at the floor.
But his eyes moved in thought. Embroidered purple
And Priam’s scepter touched him less. He dwelt
More on his daughter’s wedding and her union.
Old Faunus’ presage—in his heart he mulled it:
This was the foreign voyager fate pledged him
As son-­in-­law, to join him as an equal
In ruling; his descendants would be heroes,
And all the world would come beneath their power.
At last he spoke in joy: “Gods bless our plans
And their own prophecy. Take what you ask for;
And I accept your gifts. While I am reigning,
You’ll have a rich land, you’ll have wealth like Troy’s.
But if Aeneas has such eager longing
To be my guest here and be called my ally,
Then let him come—a friend’s face holds no terror.
I’ll clasp your king’s hand, making good this treaty.
But you must take this message back to him:
I have a daughter whom an oracle
And many heavenly signs forbid my giving
To one of our race. Strangers come to Latium
Will be our sons through marriage, and the new stock
Will reach the stars. I think—I hope—it’s this man
Fate calls for, if my intuition’s right.”
The lord chose from the sleek three hundred horses
Housed in his high-­roofed barn. He had one led
To every Trojan there, down through their ranks—
Swift mounts—and they had saddlecloths embroidered
With purple, and gold collars hanging down.
Their trappings were of gold; they chewed gold bits.
A chariot and team were for Aeneas,
A fire-­breathing pair, heavenly mix-­breeds:
Sly Circe’d stolen stallions from her father
To cross with mortal mares. Aeneas’ men,

. 182 .

250

255

260

265

270

275

280

BOOK 7
Now mounted high, conveyed Latinus’ gifts,
Speeches, and terms for peace back to the camp.
Then Jove’s fierce wife flew in her chariot
From Inachus’ home, Argos. From on high,
In far-­off Pachynus in Sicily,
She saw Aeneas happy, with his fleet:
They worked at building, settled trustingly,
Forgot their ships. She halted, pierced by grief,
Then shook her head, and from her heart poured this:
“That hated Phrygian race, their fate opposed
To mine! They couldn’t die on Sigeum’s plain,
Couldn’t stay conquered? Trojans couldn’t burn
When Troy burned? Through the fire and the onslaughts
They found a way. At last, I guess, my power
Lies slack and weary from its load of hatred.
I even stooped to persecute their exile,
Harrying refugees across the ocean.
The sea and sky have no strength left to fight them.
What good the Syrtes, Scylla, vast Charybdis?
Trojans nest in the longed-­for Tiber, fearing
Neither the deep nor me. Mars’ strength destroyed
The monstrous Lapiths. Jove, who sired the gods,
Assuaged Diana’s rage with Calydon,
The ancient town. What great crimes earned such sanctions?
But I, Jove’s mighty wife, have shrunk from nothing,
Tried every useless way, and now am beaten—
287–­
From Inachus’ home, Argos:
The Greek city of Argos was sacred to
Juno. Inachus was a river god there.
294–­Sigeum’s plain: A promontory
near Troy.
304–5–­
Mars’ strength destroyed
the monstrous Lapiths: The king of the
Lapiths, Pirithoüs, did not invite Mars to

285

290

295

300

305

his wedding, so Mars incited a war between the Lapiths and the Centaurs.
306–­
Assuaged Diana’s rage with
Caly­don: When King Oeneus of Calydon did not include Diana in a sacrifice
she sent a monstrous boar to ravage his
realm.

. 183 .

BOOK 7
Aeneas did this! If my own power fails,
I’ll find help anywhere I can—no scruples!
Heaven resists me? I’ll try Acheron.
Fate grants them entrance to the Latin kingdom;
Lavinia must be Aeneas’ wife.
But I can put off these great happenings,
And crush the subjects of this pair of kings:
Marriage, allying them, will have this price;
Blood from both sides will dower you, child; Bellona
Will be your escort. Fire as a bridegroom
Hasn’t been born from Hecuba alone.
No, Venus’ child will be another Paris,
A funeral torch to burn a reborn Troy.”
Terrible now, she sped to earth, to summon
Allecto, mourning-bringer, from her dark home
Below among the Furies. Treachery,
War, rage, atrocities are in her heart.
Her father, Pluto, and her hellish sisters
Loathe her themselves, the monster; all her dire forms
And faces, all the black snakes sprouting from her.
Now Juno made this speech, inciting her:
“Daughter of Night, lend me your special service
And safeguard my prestige. Keep it from yielding;
Don’t let Aeneas’ crew buy off Latinus
Through marriage, or lay siege to Italy.
You can set brothers who were friends at war,
Destroying homes with hate, invading them,
Whip, flames of death in hand. A thousand names
Are yours, a thousand torments. Rouse your genius,
Shatter their treaties, sow the seeds of war—

319–20–­Fire as a bridegroom hasn’t
been born from Hecuba alone: A reference to Hecuba’s son Paris, whose abduction of Helen started the Trojan War;

310

315

320

325

330

335

while pregnant, Hecuba had dreamt that
she would give birth to a fiery torch.
324–­Allecto: one of the three Furies.

. 184 .

BOOK 7
War! Wished, demanded, started all at once!”
Allecto, steeped in Gorgon poisons, rushed
To the Laurentian king’s high halls in Latium
And lurked there, at the threshold of Amata,
Who smoldered with a woman’s anxious anger:
Trojans had come—would they steal Turnus’ wedding?
Dark snakes made up the Fury’s hair: she tossed one
To glide—maddening, hellish—through the dress
Into the heart, and rattled all the house.
Beneath her clothes it coiled, around her smooth breasts.
She couldn’t feel it as it breathed its poison—
Her frenzy. As a gold chain, that huge serpent
Twined her neck, hung as ribbon from her headband,
Wove through her hair and slid around her body.
The venom oozed in, and the sickness started
To storm her senses, wrap her bones in fire.
Before the flames engulfed her heart and mind,
She spoke quite gently, as a mother would,
And wept: Her daughter married to a Phrygian!
“You’ll give Lavinia to Trojan exiles,
Not pitying your child, yourself, or me?
The lying pirate’s sure to snatch our girl
Off to the deep on the first wind. That’s how
The Phrygian shepherd infiltrated Sparta
And hauled off Helen, Leda’s child, to Troy.
Your oath? The love you once had for your people?
Your promises to Turnus, who is family?
If Latins need a foreign son-­in-­law,
And it is fixed and ordered by your father,
Then every land that’s free, outside our power,

341– ­Gorgon poisons: The Furies
were sometimes depicted with snakes for
hair, linking them to the Gorgons, the
most famous of whom was Medusa.

340

345

350

355

360

365

343–­Amata: Latinus’ queen, who fa‑
vored Turnus as a son-­in-­law.
363–­The Phrygian shepherd: Paris.

. 185 .

BOOK 7
Is foreign, I think—can’t the gods mean that?
Just trace the house of Turnus from its start:
Acrisius, Inachus—Mycenae’s heart’s blood.”
She found these words were useless, for Latinus
Was firm. The venom slipped, infuriating,
Into her entrails, seeped all through her body.
Now monstrous visions haunted that poor woman.
Frenzied, she ran amok all through the city,
Like a top flitting under coiling whip blows;
Boys in intent play, in an empty courtyard,
Send it in spacious circles. At the lash,
It rushes on its curving course. The young group
Watches in wonder as the blows inspire
The flying boxwood. No less fiercely driven,
Amata ran straight through the haughty city.
With a sham Bacchus goading her, she dashed
Into the woods, a greater, wilder outrage,
And hid her daughter in the leafy mountains,
To thwart, to steal her marriage to a Trojan.
She roared, “O Bacchus, only you deserve her!
She takes in hand your pliant thyrsus, dances
Around you, grows a lock of hair to give you.”
Word flew; the other mothers caught her passion,
Which drove them from their homes out into new ones,
Hearts flaming, heads and necks bare to the wind.
Some of them filled the sky with shivering howls,
Wore skins, held spear shafts wound with grapevine leaves.
Fevered Amata waved a torch among them
And sang the wedding of her child and Turnus,

372–­Acrisius, Inachus: Early Greek
kings. Amata is trying to qualify Turnus
for the prophecy that Lavinia must marry
a foreigner by citing his Greek ancestry.
385–­With a sham Bacchus goading

370

375

380

385

390

395

her: Amata is consciously acting like a
bacchant, one of the frenzied female followers of Bacchus.
390–­thyrsus: An ivy-­
covered staff
carried by Bacchus.

. 186 .

BOOK 7
Rolling red eyes. She gave a sudden shriek:
“Oh, listen, mothers everywhere in Latium,
If your good hearts still cherish poor Amata,
And if my flouted mother-­rights disturb you,
Unbind your hair, take up these secret rites.”
Allecto used such Bacchic goads to harry
The queen all through the bleak, beast-­haunted forest.
Pleased with this first sharp frenzy, the grim goddess
Who’d wrecked Latinus’ plans and all his household
Didn’t delay but on her dark wings sought
The brave Rutulian’s town (where Danaë,
Driven, they say, by headlong South Winds, founded
A settlement for Argives. It was called
Ardea by the ancients—still a great name;
Its wealth is gone, though). There, in his high palace,
Turnus was sleeping through the black of midnight.
Allecto stripped off her ferocious form
And changed to an old woman: plowed her forehead
With ugly lines, whitened her hair and bound it
With olive twigs and ribbons, to resemble
Calybe, Juno’s priestess at her shrine.
She came before the young man’s eyes and spoke:
“Turnus, you let your striving go for nothing?
You watch your scepter pass to Trojan settlers?
The king denies the bride your blood has paid for.
He wants a foreigner to have his kingdom.
They laugh at you! Take useless risks and scatter
409–­
The brave Rutulian’s town:
Turnus’s home, Ardea, chief city of the
Rutulians.
409–­Danaë: It was prophesied
that Danaë’s son would kill her father,
Acrisius, so upon finding her pregnant
by Jupiter, Acrisius locked her and her
baby, Perseus, in a chest and set them

400

405

410

415

420

425

adrift. Vergil’s Amata makes the unique
claim that she landed in Italy and was an
ancestor of Turnus, making him of foreign (Greek) heritage.
418–­ribbons: Fillets; see 2.133n.
419–­Juno’s priestess at her shrine:
There is a temple of Juno in Ardea.

. 187 .

BOOK 7
Etruscan lines, for Latium’s peace and safety.
Almighty Juno ordered me to say this
Plainly, as you were resting in the still night.
Up, then, and arm the young men, march them out
To fight. Burn, with their painted ships, the lords
Of Phrygia squatting by your lovely river.
The gods’ great power demands that King Latinus,
Unless he does your will and grants your wedding,
Should find at last what you are like in battle.”
The young man answered, sneering at the prophet:
“The news has not escaped me, as you think:
The fleet has traveled into Tiber’s waters.
I don’t need made-­up panic. Royal Juno
Hasn’t forgotten me.
Your failing and oblivious old age
Torments you pointlessly with these false fears
And prophecies about the clash of kings.
Your task is guarding the gods’ effigies.
Men, who fight wars, will deal with war and peace.”
The speech inflamed Allecto. While still speaking,
The young man felt a sudden terror seize him
And gaped: so many snakes hissed on the Fury,
So monstrous was the sight. He stopped and stammered.
She shoved him back, her flaming eyes assailed him.
Two snakes reared from her head. She made the whips
She brandished hiss, and spoke from foaming lips:
“Just look at how oblivious I am,
With these false fears about the clash of kings.
See! From the deadly sisters’ home I come,
With death and war in hand.”
She spoke, and threw a smoking torch at him,
To lodge its black light in his youthful breast.
Terror crashed through his sleep, and sweat broke out
To cover him and soak him to the bones.
He roared for arms and searched his bed, his rooms

. 188 .

430

435

440

445

450

455

460

BOOK 7
In savage iron-­lust, depraved war frenzy,
And rage above all; as a heap of twigs
Is lit to roar beneath a frothing cauldron;
The water leaps and burns—inside there storms
A smoky river, foam goes burgeoning
Beyond its confines, shooting black steam skyward.
Peace was profaned: he sent his young lieutenants
To King Latinus, ordered arms prepared,
Italy guarded, enemies thrust out.
Latins and Trojans—he could face them both.
He told the gods what he would give for victory.
Rutulians egged each other on to fight.
His fine and graceful youth moved some, and some
His royal bloodline or his glorious warcraft.
While Turnus filled his soldiers’ hearts with fire,
Hell-­winged Allecto, with a new ploy, hurried
Off to the Trojans. Scouting out the shore,
Where handsome, swift, and cunning Iulus hunted,
The hellish virgin struck the dogs with madness.
She tossed a scent they knew before their noses,
To goad them on a deer’s trail. Anguish started
This way, and kindled rustic hearts for war.
There was a splendid stag, with wide-­spread antlers.
Together with his young sons, Tyrrhus, master
Of the king’s herds and keeper of his broad plains,
Had taken it, a suckling then, and reared it.
Silvia, the boys’ sister, lavished care
On the pet, twined its antlers with soft garlands,
Combed it and bathed it in a crystal spring.
It ate its owners’ food, put up with stroking,
And though it roamed the woods, it made its own way
484–­Tyrrhus: The king’s chief herdsman; the Latin word also means “Etruscan.”

465

470

475

480

485

490

487–­Silvia: Her name means “of the
woodland.”

. 189 .

BOOK 7
Back to their door, however late at night.
Iulus’ ferocious dogs now started it—
It had strayed far from home and swum upstream
And rested from the heat beneath a green bank.
Ascanius was fired by ambition
And aimed an arrow out of his bent bow.
A god directed his uncertain hand.
The dart twanged out and sang through flanks and belly.
The wounded beast sought refuge in its home.
Moaning and bleeding, limping to the barn,
It filled the buildings with beseeching wails.
Silvia heard, in horror beat her forearms,
And called the hardy country men to help.
In the still woods the vicious Fury hid.
Instantly they were there: one had a charred torch;
The next a club with swollen knots. Rage rummaged
Its weapons out, and Tyrrhus marshaled forces:
From quartering a log of oak with wedges,
He’d turned and seized his ax in panting fury.
Perched on a lookout, the divine fiend saw
More to do. Moving to a barn’s high rooftop,
She sent her hellish voice out through a curved horn—
A shepherd’s call, which set the whole deep forest
Immediately echoing and trembling
Clear to Diana’s lake and the Nar River,
White with its sulfur, and Velinus’ springs.
Mothers in fear pressed children to their breasts.
The sturdy farmers swarmed from everywhere,
Answering the grim trumpet’s call and seizing
Whatever weapons were at hand. The Trojans

516–­Diana’s lake: The Lake of Diana,
near the town of Aricia.
516–­Nar River: The main tributary
of the Tiber.

495

500

505

510

515

520

517–­Velinus’ springs: A lake in Sa‑
bine lands; appears again at 7.712.

. 190 .

BOOK 7
Poured from their own gate, to Ascanius’ aid.
Both sides lined up. It was no yokel brawl now
With burnt stakes and hard cudgels, but a contest
Of two-­edged blades; a darkly bristling crop
Of swords stretched far away. Bronze armor flashed,
Struck by the sun; the light shot to the clouds:
As when the surface of the sea begins
To whiten, slowly rising, shooting waves
Higher, until its lowest depths heave skyward.
Now at the front, the eldest son of Tyrrhus,
Young Almo, fell. A hissing arrow struck him
And lodged below his throat, to choke with blood
The thin soft passage of his voice and life breath.
Around him many dead lay; old Galaesus
Had stepped between to plead for peace—most just
And wealthiest Italian of those days:
Five bleating and five lowing herds were driven
Over his soil; a hundred plowshares turned it.
Equally matched, men filled the plain with fighting.
This was the mighty goddess’ pledge: a bloodstain
Starting the war—a first clash—deaths. Allecto
Left Italy and passed through airy heaven
And spoke to Juno haughtily, in triumph:
“Here is your conflict, sealed by dismal war.
Now tell them to be friends, bound by a treaty.
I’ve spattered Trojans with Italian blood.
I’ll do more if you sanction it. My rumors
Will spread the war to nearby towns and kindle
The lust for frenzied Mars. They’ll come to help
From everywhere. I’ll strew the land with arms.”
“Enough deceit and fear for now,” said Juno.
“They’re fighting hand to hand, with solid motives.
Chance offered weapons; fresh blood sullies them.
Venus’ superior son and King Latinus
Can have this as a wedding and a marriage.

. 191 .

525

530

535

540

545

550

555

BOOK 7
The father, though, Olympus’ king, would surely
Not want you wandering at will in heaven.
Get out then. I’ll direct whatever action
Is called for now.” So Saturn’s daughter spoke.
The other raised her wings, which hissed with snakes,
And left the steep sky for her home in hell.
Midway through Italy, beneath high mountains,
Ampsanctus lies, a famous valley, legend
In many lands. Dark forests crowd both sides
With their thick leaves. A torrent in the middle
Crashes through rocks and twists its frothing waters.
They point a fearsome cave out there, where cruel Dis
Breathes from the chinks, and Acheron breaks through
A poisoned pit. The Fury, hateful power,
Slipped in, unburdening the earth and sky.
Now Saturn’s queenly daughter put the last touch
On war. The shepherd’s whole contingent ran
From battle to the town, and brought the dead—
Young Almo and Galaesus with his torn face—
Imploring gods, appealing to Latinus.
To raging murder charges Turnus added
New alarms: Trojans asked to share the kingdom,
Easterners breeding in, himself expelled.
The families of the matrons running wild
Through trackless woods in Bacchic bands now gathered
(Amata’s name had weight) demanding war,
Evil war. Everyone was now possessed;
The omens, the decrees of fate meant nothing.
They avidly besieged Latinus’ palace.
A cliff above the sea, he stood unmoving—
A sea cliff in reverberating storms;
Firm in its bulk it holds, though waves throng roaring
564–­Ampsanctus: A sulfuric lake
in southern Italy. The ancients believed

560

565

570

575

580

585

there was an entrance to the Underworld
there.

. 192 .

BOOK 7
Around it. Crags and frothing boulders moan—
Unshaken, pouring back the battered seaweed.
The old man had no power to defeat
Their blind plans—heartless Juno set things going.
Often he called on gods and empty air:
“Fate wrecks our ship; a whirlwind whips us onward.
Poor things, you’ll make atonement with your blood.
Turnus, your sin will bring harsh punishment.
Too late you’ll pray and try to buy the gods off.
But I’ve earned rest. I’m on the haven’s edge,
And robbed of nothing but a happy death.”
He kept indoors and dropped the reins of state.
There was a ritual in Hesperian Latium,
Which Alban cities afterward kept sacred,
And lofty Rome performs, when war is launched—
Whether against Hyrcanians or Getans
Or Arabs, or if it’s an eastward march
To claim back standards from the Parthians.
There stand twin Gates of War (so they are named),
Held sacred in the dread of savage Mars.
Eternal iron and a hundred bronze bars
Seal them, and Janus is their guardian.
When senators resolve to fight, the consul,
Marked out by Quirinal robe and Gabine belt,
With his own hands throws wide the creaking doors,
And gives the call to war. The fighting men
Follow, and bronze horns blast their harsh assent.
601–15–­There was a ritual . . . as­
sent: On the Gates of War see 1.294n.
This practice, along with Quirinal robes
typically worn by Roman consuls (line
612), is contemporary to Vergil but attributed to the ancient Latins.
604–5–­Hyrcanians . . . Getans . . .
Arabs: Foreigners; the Getae (north of

590

595

600

605

610

615

the Danube) were conquered during Augustus’s reign.
606–­claim back standards from the
Parthians: Augustus’s great diplomatic
achievement. In 20 BCE he recovered
military standards lost to the Parthians
by Crassus in 53 BCE.

. 193 .

BOOK 7
Though ordered to perform this rite, declaring
War on the Trojans through these the gloomy portals,
Father Latinus shrank from touching them.
He fled the hateful task and hid in shadows.
But then the queen of heaven, Saturn’s daughter,
Flew down herself to force the iron war gates
Apart, and pushed until the hinges turned.
Italy, calm and still before, now blazed.
Some looked to march across the plains, some reared
Wildly on dusty mounts. All called for weapons.
Some used thick fat to polish shields and lances,
And others ground their axes sharp on whetstones.
The trumpet thrilled them, hoisted standards thrilled them.
Five mighty cities made their anvils echo:
Proud Tibur, strong Atina, Ardea,
Towered Antemnae, Crustumerium
Hollowed out sturdy helmets and wove shields
From bending wicker, or shaped cuirasses
From bronze, or glossy greaves from pliant silver.
Forgetting their devotion to the plowshare
And sickle, men reforged their fathers’ blades.
Horns blared, the watchword spread—the war had come.
One snatched his helmet on the run from home.
One strained to yoke his neighing team, put on
His shield, gold-­woven breastplate, trusted sword.
Stir my song, Muses, open Helicon.
What kings were roused to war, what armies followed
To fill the plains, what heroes bloomed already
In that propitious soil, what arms grew hot there?

630–31–­
Tibur, . . . Atina, Ardea,
. . . Antemnae, Crustumerium: Cities of
Latium.
641–­
Stir my song, Muses, open
Helicon: The nine Muses, who lived on

620

625

630

635

640

Mount Helicon in Boeotia, traditionally
inspired poets. Homer invoked them before his catalogue of ships in book 2 of
the Iliad, which Vergil is about to imitate
with a catalogue of Latin troops.

. 194 .

BOOK 7
You know it and can tell it, goddesses;
Barely a breath can reach me of the story.
Out of Etruria, Mezentius,
Wild scorner of the gods, first armed his men
And marched, with his son Lausus—there was no one
Handsomer, save for Turnus of Laurentum—
Lausus, horse-­tamer, conqueror of wild things,
Who led a thousand men (what good to him?)
From Caere and deserved more in obeying
His father—he deserved a better father.
Next Aventinus, splendid Hercules’
Splendid child, strutted his prize chariot team.
The Hydra, girdled with a hundred snakes,
His father’s emblem, marked his shield. The priestess
Rhea had brought him to the shores of light
In secret, on the wooded Aventine.
She’d mated with the god, who came as victor
From slaughtered Geryon to Laurentian fields
And bathed his Spanish cows in Tuscan currents.
His son’s men now were armed with spears and fierce pikes
And polished swords and Sabine javelins.
He went on foot himself, a lion’s huge skin—
Dire, matted, bristling, white-­toothed—on his head
And swept around him. Dauntingly he came
Into the palace in the hero’s cloak.
Twin brothers then left Tibur’s walls (a third
Brother, Tiburtus, gave their clan its name):
653–­Caere: The capital of the Etruscans, home of Mezentius and Lausus.
655–­Aventinus: Vergil’s invented
namesake for the famous Aventine Hill
in Rome.
662–­Geryon: The Giant whom Hercules slew to steal his cattle, another of
his Labors; cf. 6.289.

645

650

655

660

665

670

665–­Sabine: A native Italian people,
some of whom intermarried with the
Romans after the founding of Rome
(the Romans kidnapped them in what
is known as the rape of the Sabine
Women).
670–­Tibur: An ancient Etruscan
town, modern Tivoli.

. 195 .

BOOK 7
Catillus and keen Coras, youthful Argives,
Ran at the front, where spears and arrows swarmed—
As cloud-­born Centaurs leave some looming peak
To dash down Homole or snowy Othrys
At great speed; massive forest yields a path;
Crashing, the underbrush gives way to them.
Caeculus too was there, Praeneste’s founder,
In lasting legend Vulcan’s royal child
Born among herds and found beside a hearth.
An army came with him, from far-­flung farms
At high Praeneste, Juno’s Gabian
Fields, the cold Anio’s banks, the Hernici’s
Stream-­sprinkled rocks. Some, rich Anagnia nurtured,
Some, Father Amasenus’ river. Not all
Had armor or loud chariots or shields.
Most of the men were slingers of pale lead;
Others waved two spears; tawny caps of wolf fur
Covered their heads. With nothing on their left feet,
And crudely made right boots, they strode along.
Messapus, tamer of horses, son of Neptune—
Guarded by heaven’s will from sword and fire—
Abruptly called to arms tribes long inactive,
Armies unused to war, and drew his own sword.
672–­Argives: Greeks.
674– ­cloud-­born Centaurs: Ixion
attempted to rape Juno, not realizing
Jupiter had replaced her with a Juno-­
shaped cloud. The union produced the
Centaurs.
675–­Homole . . . Othrys: A town and
mountain in Thessaly, near the home of
the Centaurs.
678–­Praeneste: modern Palestrina,
in the Apennines, not far from Rome.
682–84–­
Gabian fields . . . Anio
. . . Hernici . . . Anagnia: Vergil describes

675

680

685

690

various locales in central Italy. Juno was
a special patron of the city of Gabii.
The Hernici’s territory was famous for
its rocks; the name may come from the
Sabine word for rock (herna).
685–­Amasenus: This river will later
block King Metabus and the infant
Camilla as they flee the Volsci: 11.539–
66.
689–­With nothing on their left feet:
Some ancient peoples considered that
leaving the left foot unshod was advantageous to soldiers throwing missiles.

. 196 .

BOOK 7
Fescennia’s fort, Falisci-­on-­the-­Plain,
Soracte’s peaks, Flavinian fields, Ciminus’
Mountain and lake, Capena’s groves all sent them:
Marching in numbered ranks, they sang their king,
Like snowy swans among the flowing clouds,
On their way back from feeding, pouring sweet songs
From their long necks to make the Asian marsh
And river ring far off.
No one would think bronze battle lines were massing
From the great throng, but that a soaring, hoarse cloud
Of birds swarmed from the ocean to the shore.
Clausus, of ancient Sabine stock, led forward
A huge force (he was such a force, alone;
It was his Claudian clan that spread to Latium
After the Sabines gained a share in Rome):
Old Quirites, Amiternans, the whole force
From olive-­rich Mutusca and Erutum;
Troops from Velinus country, walled Nomentum,
Tetrica’s rough cliffs and Severus Mountain,
Casperia, Foruli, Himella’s stream, cold Nursia;
Some drank out of the Fabaris and Tiber;
Ortinian horsemen came, whole Latin towns,
And those whose home the Allia—cursed name—passes:
695–97–­Fescennia’s fort . . . Capena’s
groves: Places in southern Etruria just
north of the Tiber.
701–­the Asian Marsh: A region on
the river Caÿster in Lydia.
706–8–­Clausus . . . Claudian clan:
Clausus is a Sabine whom Vergil seems
to make the ancestor of the Claudians, a
family that in Vergil’s time included the
two Marcelli (6.855–86) and Tiberius
Claudius Nero (not to be confused with
the emperor Nero), father of the future
emperor Tiberius.
710– ­Quirites: Another name for

695

700

705

710

715

the Romans, viewed here as an ancient
people; the name was derived from the
Sabine town Cures.
711:–­Mutusca and Erutum: Cities in
Sabine territory.
712–14–­Velinus country . . . Nursia:
All in Sabine territory.
715–­Fabaris: A small river which
flows into the Tiber; now called the
Farfa.
717–­the Allia—cursed name: In 390
BCE the Gauls defeated the Roman army
at the river Allia and captured Rome
itself.

. 197 .

BOOK 7
As many as the glittering Libyan waves,
When cruel Orion dips in winter seas;
As many as the wheat ears scorched by spring sun
720
On Lycia’s fields of gold, or Hermus’ plains.
Shields sounded, and the earth was stunned with tramping.
Halaesus, Agamemnon’s crony, hateful
To Troy, now yoked his chariot, rushed a thousand
Fierce clans to Turnus’ side, hoers of vineyards
725
In fertile Massica. Auruncan lords
Swept men from high hills. Sidicinian plains,
Cales, shallow Volturnus’ banks sent others.
Savage Saticulans and a contingent
Of Oscans brought familiar polished spears
730
To throw with pliant cords, left-­handed shields,
And curving swords for fighting at close quarters.
My poem will not pass over Oebalus
In silence: Telon in old age begat him
On the nymph Sebethis. In Capreae
735
He ruled the Teleboae, but his son
Fretted there. To the broad Sarrastian lands,
He spread his realm, to plains the Sarnus waters,
To Rufrae, Batulum, Celemna’s farmers,
To apple land beneath Abella’s walls.
740
His men, like Germans, carried spears with barbs.
Their heads were covered with the bark of cork trees.
Their small shields flashed with bronze, their swords with gold.
Ufens was sent to war from highland Nersae.
719– ­Orion: The constellation; its
risings and settings were associated with
stormy seas.
721–­Lycia . . . Hermus: Places in Asia
Minor; Hermus is a river in Lydia.
726–­Massica: The area surrounding Mount Massicus, famous during antiquity for its wine.
728–­Volturnus: A river in Campania.

730– ­Oscans: An ancient people of
Campania.
733–36–­
Oebalus . . . Capreae
. . . Teleboae: Oebalus is from the Naples
area; his father, Telon, was king of Capri,
which was settled by the Teleboans.
738–­the Sarnus: A river between
Naples and Salerno.
740–­Abella: A town in Campania.

. 198 .

BOOK 7
His fame was great, his war achievements splendid,
His barbarous Aequiculans addicted
To hunting in the woods. They lived on hard soil,
Plowed wearing armor, constantly collected
Fresh loot, and liked to live on what they’d taken.
From the Marruvian people valiant Umbro
The priest came also, sent by King Archippus.
Lush olive leaves festooned the warrior’s helmet.
There was no breed of poison-­breathing viper
He couldn’t put to sleep with charms and stroking.
He soothed their rage and remedied their bites,
And yet he couldn’t cure a Trojan spear strike.
Sleep-­bringing spells and herbs the Marsians
Find in their hills were useless for the wound,
Glassy-­waved Fucinus, Angitian woods,
The clear pools wept for him.
Virbius marched there too, Hippolytus’
Glorious child, Aricia’s noble nursling,
Raised in Egeria’s grove, around the moist shores
Where sumptuous gifts can win Diana’s favor.
His cunning stepmother and bolting horses
Had torn Hippolytus apart: he paid
In blood the price his father claimed; Diana,
It’s said, who loved him, used the Healer’s herbs
750–­Marruvian: Marruvium was a
town near Lake Fucinus (modern Fucine) in central Italy.
756–­a Trojan spear strike: He will
fall to Aeneas’ spear: see 10.543–45.
757–­Marsians: A people of central
Italy.
759–­Fucinus, Angitian woods: Angite was the sister of the witch Circe. Her
grove was in the territory of the Marsians, near Lake Fucinus.
761–69–­
Virbius . . . heaven: Ac-

745

750

755

760

765

cording to one tradition, Hippolytus rebuffed the advances of his stepmother,
Phaedra, after vowing chastity to Diana.
Under Venus’ influence Phaedra falsely
accused him of rape. His father, Theseus,
then cursed him, resulting in his death.
With medicines from Aesculapius (the
Healer), son of Apollo, Diana caused him
to be reborn as Virbius, a forest god worshipped in Italy.
763–­Egeria: A nymph who instructed Numa, Rome’s second king.

. 199 .

BOOK 7
To make him rise again to starry heaven.
Then the almighty father, in his anger
At a mortal brought from hell to light and life,
Struck Phoebus’ son and blasted to the Styx
The one who’d found this potent remedy.
But kind Diana gave Hippolytus
A refuge in the nymph Egeria’s woodland,
To spend his life obscurely, with a new name,
Virbius, in the woods of Italy.
And so the goddess’ sacred grove and temple
Bars hard-­hooved horses like the team that wrecked
His chariot, when sea-­beasts panicked them.
His son, however, drove an eager pair
Over the flat plain, hurtling into war.
Turnus moved back and forth along the front,
Beautiful, armed, a head above the others.
His triple-­plumed high helmet reared the emblem
Of a Chimera, spewing flames of Etna:
Her ruinous breath grew wilder, her roar louder
As battle grew more brutal and blood flowed.
Io in gold was blazoned on his smooth shield—
A rough-­haired, butting cow. Such detail! Argus
Guarded her, and her father, Inachus,
Poured his stream from a silver urn. Behind,
Foot soldiers, shields, ranks packed the plain: young Argives,
Auruncans and Rutulians, primeval
Sicanians, a Sacranian array,
Labicians who carried painted bucklers;
And men who plowed the uplands of the Tiber,

786–­Chimera: A mythological creature.
789–91–­Io . . . Inachus: Io, daughter
of the river god Inachus, was seduced by
Jupiter and changed into a cow to protect

770

775

780

785

790

795

her from his jealous wife, Juno. The cow
was guarded by a hundred-­eyed monster
named Argus. For Turnus’ purported
connection to this area, see 7.372n.

. 200 .

BOOK 7
Numicus’ holy shore, Rutulian hills,
And Circe’s ridge—domains of Jove of Anxur
And of Feronia, glad in her green grove;
Troops from Satura’s black swamp, and the valley
Cold Ufens threads, to duck into the sea.
Last came Camilla of the Volsci,
Leading a cavalry that bloomed with bronze.
A female warrior, stranger to Minerva’s
Tasks and the distaff, though she was a girl,
She endured combat and outran the wind.
She could have skimmed the tips of standing grain
Over a field and spared the tender heads,
Or glided clear across the swelling ocean
And kept her swift feet dry above the surface.
Men poured from fields and matrons out of houses
To gaze on her in wonder as she rode.
They gaped, astonished at the royal splendor
Of purple on smooth shoulders, the gold hair clasp—
The Lycian quiver hanging at her back,
The shepherd’s staff of myrtle, tipped with iron.

798–­Numicus: See 7.151n.
799–800–­Anxur . . . Feronia: There
was a temple and sanctuary of the wilderness goddess Feronia near Anxur, modern Terracina.
801–­Satura’s black swamp: In the
Pomptine marshes.

800

805

810

815

802– ­Cold Ufens: Here a river; at
7.744 and 8.7 a warrior.
803:–­Camilla of the Volsci: Vergil’s
female warrior, who resembles the Amazon queen Penthesilea in epic poems following Homer. She will feature prominently in the upcoming war.

. 201 .

BOOK 8

The trumpets gave a harsh blare. Turnus raised
The war sign from the tower of Laurentum,
And whipped his horses up, and clashed his weapons.
Instantly all of Latium joined in frenzy
And panic. Its young men grew cruel and savage.
The foremost leaders levied troops: Messapus,
Ufens, Mezentius the gods’ reviler
Stripped all the lands of farmers. Venulus,
Sent to ask help from Diomedes’ city,
Reported Trojans building homes in Latium,
Aeneas shipping in his conquered gods
And claiming fate had called him to be king;
And many peoples joined the Trojan fighter—
Far over Latium his renown was growing;
But Diomedes could discern more clearly
Than either King Latinus or King Turnus
His purpose and what he desired from victory.
Meanwhile, great waves of worries tossed the hero,
The son of Troy, at everything he saw.
His thoughts were darting one way, then another,
At every side of his perplexity,

2–­Laurentum: Latinus’ city, though
Turnus now seems to be acting as leader.
6–­Messapus: A king of Etruria, famous as a horse-­tamer.

5

10

15

20

9–­Diomedes’ city: Argyripa, also
called Arpi; Diomedes, a Greek warrior
at Troy, settled in Italy after the war.
11–­conquered gods: See 1.379n.

. 202 .

BOOK 8
Like shivering light reflected from the water
In bronze urns, from the sun or shining moon;
Flittering all around, then shooting upward
To strike the panels of the lofty ceiling.
Now it was night. Deep sleep held weary creatures
Throughout the earth, all kinds that walked and flew.
Under the tall cold sky beside the river
Father Aeneas, troubled by grim war,
Stretched out to give his body rest at last.
The old man Tiberinus, who was god there,
Appeared: out of the pleasant stream he rose
Through poplar leaves. A thin gray robe of linen
Covered his body, shady reeds his hair.
He spoke and took away Aeneas’ cares:
“Child of the gods who brings Troy back to us
From enemies, to keep its tower forever:
Laurentum’s earth and Latium’s fields await you;
They’re promised for your home and gods—persist!
Have courage, though war threatens. Heaven’s fury
Has all has drawn back.
But now, as proof this was no empty dream,
You’ll find a giant sow with thirty newborns
Lying beneath a holm oak on the bank:
White on the dark soil, white young at her teats.
The city will be there, and your sure rest.
In thirty circling years, Ascanius
Will found the city Alba—glorious name.
22–25–­Like shivering light . . . lofty
ceiling: Vergil has adapted this simile
from Apollonius, Argonautica 3, in which
it describes Medea’s fluttering heart.
31–­Tiberinus: The god of the river
Tiber.
43–­giant sow with thirty newborns:

25

30

35

40

45

This fulfills Helenus’ prophecy at 3.389–
92.
46–­This line is thought to be spurious.
48–­Alba: Vergil hints that Alba
Longa is so named for the white color of
the sow (Latin albus).

. 203 .

BOOK 8
I prophesy the truth. I’ll show you briefly
(So listen!) how to triumph in this crisis.
Arcadians, Pallas’ lineage in this land,
Followed their king Evander and his standards
And chose a hilly site and built their city,
Named Pallanteum for their ancestor.
They’ve been at constant war with Latium’s people.
Make them your allies, join them in a treaty.
I’ll lead you up the stream between my banks;
You’ll overcome the current, rowing inland.
Son of the goddess, come! While the first stars set,
Supplicate Juno, thwart her anger’s menace
With proper prayers and vows; and pay me honor
When you prevail. I am the brimming river
Grazing these banks and cutting through the rich fields,
The azure Tiber, stream the gods most favor.
My halls are here, my source among the high towns.”
The river vanished to his basin’s deep floor,
And sleep and night departed from Aeneas.
He stood and saw the heavenly light rising,
Piously cupped his hands, and lifted water
Out of the stream, with fervent words to heaven:
“Nymphs of Laurentum, who give birth to rivers,
And Father Tiber with your holy current,
Take me and keep me safe—at last—from danger.
Because you pity our distress, wherever
Your wellsprings gush out, filling you with glory,
I’ll worship you and honor you with gifts,
Horned king of all the waters of the West.
Only stay with me: prove your godly favor.”
51–54–­
Arcadians . . . Pallanteum:
Arcadians are Greeks descended from
Pallas, Evander’s great-­grandfather. Pal­

50

55

60

65

70

75

lanteum, the city they founded in Italy,
gives its name to Rome’s Palatine Hill.

. 204 .

BOOK 8
He spoke, and chose two biremes from the fleet,
Then oarsmen, and supplied his men with weapons.
But suddenly he saw among the trees
The wondrous portent: on the grassy bank
A white sow lay stretched out beside her white brood.
Devout Aeneas offered them all up
To you, majestic Juno, at your altar.
The Tiber flowed less swollen that whole night,
Checking its current, silencing its surges,
And smoothed its surface to the gentle peace
Of marshland so the rowers wouldn’t struggle,
And thus, with cheers, they sped along their way.
Greased fir slid through the shallows; woods and water
Wondered to see strange things: the warriors’ shields
Shining far off, and painted, swimming hulls.
The men wore out a day and night in rowing
Up the long bends. Trees of all kinds gave shelter,
And the keels cut the virid, still reflections.
The burning sun had climbed to its mid-­orbit
When they saw distant walls, a citadel,
Roofs of sparse homes—things Roman power now
Lifts heavenward; Evander’s poor domain then.
Quickly they turned their prows and neared the city.
That day it happened the Arcadian king
Honored great Hercules and other gods
Outside the city in a grove. His son
Pallas, young nobles, and the humble Senate
Stood by while incense burned, blood steamed at altars.

79–­biremes: A Greek warship with
two decks of oars.
103–­Hercules: Hercules defeated the
monster Cacus near Pallanteum, as described in 8.190–267.

80

85

90

95

100

105

105–­Pallas: Soon to be a close companion of Aeneas.
105–­Senate: Vergil assimilates Evander’s settlement to Rome.

. 205 .

BOOK 8
They saw tall ships come through the shady woods,
Gliding to shore, as rowers thrust, in silence.
The sudden sight alarmed the feasting men,
Who all stood up. “Don’t interrupt the rites!”
Pallas warned, snatched a spear, dashed toward the strangers.
From a far mound he cried, “Where are you heading
On unfamiliar roads? What is your bloodline?
Where do you come from?—and in peace or war?”
Father Aeneas answered from the high stern,
While holding out a branch of peaceful olive,
“We’re Trojan-­born, and we’re at war with Latins,
Who shamelessly attacked us fugitives.
Where is Evander? Tell him chosen leaders
From Troy have come to ask for an alliance.”
“Come ashore,” Pallas said, “though we don’t know you”—
Troy’s great name staggered him. “Speak to my father
Face to face. Be a guest-­friend in our household.”
He seized Aeneas’ hand and pressed it warmly.
They moved off from the bank into the woods.
Aeneas genially addressed the king:
“Best of men born from Greeks! Fortune has sent me,
A suppliant, to offer boughs with fillets—
Not dreading a Greek lord, Arcadian,
From the same stock as Atreus’ two sons.
No, my own rectitude, our common lineage,
The prophecies of gods, and your wide fame
Unite us, and I serve fate willingly.
Dardanus, sailing to the Teucrians,
Founded and fostered Troy. Greeks call him offspring
Of Electra, Atlas’ daughter—massive Atlas,
130–­Atreus’ two sons: Agamemnon
and Menelaus share ancestry with Evander via Maia, the mother of Mercury.
131–­our common lineage: Aeneas reminds Evander that he is related to the

110

115

120

125

130

135

Trojans too, via Dardanus and Mercury,
as explained in 131–42.
134–­Teucrians:–­See 1.235n.
136–­Electra: Sister of Maia.

. 206 .

BOOK 8
Who holds the globe in heaven on his shoulder.
Mercury was your forebear; snow-­white Maia
Gave birth to him on cold Cyllene’s summit.
If we can trust tradition, that same Atlas
Who hoists the constellations fathered Maia.
From the same blood, our families branch two ways.
This I relied on, and I used no legates
To test you slyly. Coming to your threshold,
I risked my life, a suppliant in person.
The Daunian race hounds both of us with cruel war.
They think they cannot fail, if they defeat us,
To place a tight yoke over all the West
And hold the seas that wash the north and south coasts.
Give me your pledge and take mine. Warlike spirits
Are ours, and soldiers proven sound by action.”
The whole time that Aeneas spoke, the king
Surveyed his eyes, his face, and all his form,
Then briefly answered: “Bravest of the Trojans,
I welcome you with joy, remembering
The words and voice and face of great Anchises.
Yes, Laomedon’s son Priam visited
Hesione his sister’s realm, then passed
From Salamis to cold Arcadia.
Youth’s early down was blooming on my cheeks.
The Trojan chieftains awed me, the prince Priam
Awed me; yet one strode higher than the rest,
Anchises, and I burned with boyish longing
Till I could greet the hero with a handclasp
And lead him to the town of Pheneus.
He gave me Lycian arrows when we parted,

139– ­Cyllene: A mountain in the
Peloponnese in Greece.
146–­Daunian race: Turnus’ Rutulians. Daunus was Turnus’s father.

140

145

150

155

160

165

166–­Lycian arrows: Lycians were
skilled as archers, so Lycian arrows were
especially valuable.

. 207 .

BOOK 8
A handsome quiver, and a cloak with gold threads
Woven in, and—my son’s now—twin gold bits.
My right hand makes the pledge you now desire,
And when the dawn returns to earth tomorrow,
You’ll go back cheered and helped by my resources.
Oblige us, meanwhile, since you come as friends,
And join our annual rite—delay is sinful.
Feast with your allies; start the custom now.”
The meal was over; he had food and wine
Brought back, and led the men to seats of turf.
A shaggy lion’s pelt, a maple throne’s
Cushions received Aeneas, guest of honor.
The altar’s priest and chosen keen young men
Served roasted bull, heaped baskets with the gifts
That Ceres grants to work, and poured the wine.
Aeneas and the other Trojans savored
A whole ox chine and sacrificial entrails.
When they had got the better of their hunger,
Royal Evander said, “No superstition
About old gods imposed this ritual,
This feast, this altar for a mighty being.
No, Trojan guest: saved from a savage peril,
We owe a deity this yearly rite.
First, see that cliff with overhanging rocks,
The desolation of that mountain house,
The far-­flung boulders of a giant crag fall.
A cave was there, immense in its recesses,
Half-­human, hideous Cacus’ home, cut off
From the sun’s rays. The ground was always wet
With fresh gore. Hanging on barbaric doors
Were pallid heads of men, decayed and grisly.
193–94–­A cave was there . . . Cacus’
home: Vergil adapts a local Italian myth
about Vulcan’s son Cacus.

. 208 .

170

175

180

185

190

195

BOOK 8
Vulcan had sired the monster. Cacus spewed
Vulcan’s flames blackly, moving in his vast bulk.
At last, we had, as people do, an answer
To long prayers, and a god arrived to help us:
Hercules, great avenger, proud of killing
Three-­bodied Geryon, and of the spoils:
Huge cattle grazed and waded in this valley.
Cacus’ depraved and Fury-­haunted mind
Could leave no treachery or crime untried.
He took four splendid grazing bulls away,
And four resplendent heifers. To prevent them
From making hoofprints in the right direction,
He dragged them by their tails, reversed their tracks,
And hid the stolen creatures in his dark cave.
No evidence would lead you to the place.
Amphitryon’s son now prepared to drive
His cattle onward—they had grazed their fill.
But their complaining lowing filled the forest;
With a great noise, they moved off from the hills.
One of the captives in the monstrous cave
Lowed back and thwarted Cacus’ plans to keep her.
At this, black fury blazed up in Alcides.
He snatched the heavy knotted club, his weapon,
And quickly scaled the steep and lofty mountain.
Then we saw Cacus fearful and tormented
For the first time as, faster than the East Wind,
He sought his cave. His feet were winged with terror.
He shut himself inside and broke the chain
His father’d forged for holding up the boulder,
Which toppled now, to barricade the door.

203–­the spoils: the cattle of the monster Geryon, taken as one of Hercules’
Labors.
213–­Amphitryon’s son: Hercules,

200

205

210

215

220

225

who is properly the son of Jupiter; Amphitryon is his stepfather.
219–­Alcides: Another name for Hercules.

. 209 .

BOOK 8
But now the furious Tirynthian
Was there. He gnashed his teeth and peered all over
For a way in. He raged three times around
The Aventine; three times he tried the stone door
And each time fell back, winded, in the valley.
A spire of flint, with sheared rocks all around it,
Rose from the cave’s roof, dizzying to see:
A fitting place for ghastly birds to nest.
It slanted from the ridge above the river
On the left. Wrenching from the right, he freed it,
And tore it from its roots and shoved it over.
The heights of heaven shuddered at the impact.
The stream fled backward, terrified; the banks burst.
Now Cacus’ massive caverned court was opened,
Its shadowed depths exposed—as if some power
Should split the earth clear to the resting places
In Hades and uncover that pale kingdom
The gods hate. From above, the huge abyss
Would show, the spirits tremble at the light.
The monster in the rocky hole was caught
In sudden day—he’d never howled like this.
Above, the hero persecuted him
With everything at hand, with boughs, with boulders.
Cacus in turn—since there was no escape—
Belched out a flood of smoke (amazing sight)
And wrapped his quarters in a blinding darkness,
Tearing away our view of him and heaping
A smoky, fire-­flecked midnight in the cavern.
Fierce Hercules had had enough. He plunged
Straight to the center, where the smoke surged highest,

228–­Tirynthian: Hercules was linked
with the Mycenaean city of Tiryns, his
base of operations during his Twelve
Labors.

230

235

240

245

250

255

231–­Aventine: One of the seven hills
of Rome.

. 210 .

BOOK 8
A black cloud seething from that giant cave.
There he caught Cacus spewing useless flames
In darkness, pinned and throttled him until
His eyes popped and his throat was dry and bloodless.
Now with the doors torn off, the black lair open,
The sky saw looted cows he’d tried to hide.
The ugly corpse was pulled out by the feet.
Men couldn’t satisfy their hearts with gazing
At the half-­human creature’s fearsome eyes,
His bristling chest, his face, his mouth—its fires dead.
Ever since then, we have observed this day;
Potitius was the founder of the cult,
But the Pinarian clan tends it now.
And in this grove he set the Greatest Altar—
We call it so; so it will always be.
Come, young men, give this heroism honor.
Garland your hair; with cups in your right hands,
Invoke the gods we share with glad libations.”
Hercules’ dappled dangling poplar leaves
Covered the king’s head now, and he had taken
The holy cup in hand. Keenly, all present
Prayed to the gods, with wine poured on the table.
The sky moved down, and evening drew in closer.
Potitius led a file of priests, who wore
The ritual belted furs and carried torches.
Again they feasted, bringing pleasant gifts
For the next course, and full trays heaped the altars.
The Salii, in crowns of poplar branches,

269–70–­Potitius . . . Pinarian clan:
Families of Rome who were in charge of
the cult of Hercules.
271–­Greatest Altar: The ara maxima,
in the Forum Boarium at Rome.

260

265

270

275

280

285

276–­poplar leaves: The poplar was
associated with Hercules.
285–­Salii: Roman priests usually associated with Mars; they recur at 8.663.

. 211 .

BOOK 8
Gathered to chant around the lighted altars.
A young choir and an old one sang the valor
Of Hercules, how he first throttled monsters,
The twin snakes that his father’s wife had sent,
Then overthrew Oechalia and Troy,
Towns great in war. For King Eurystheus
He endured countless labors, through the spite
Of Juno. “Triumphs everywhere! You slaughtered
The cloud-­born Centaurs Pholus and Hylaeus,
The Cretan beast, the giant Nemean lion.
You panicked Stygian pools and Hades’ guard,
Sprawled over gnawed bones in his bloody cave.
You even faced Typhoeus with his weapons
Raised high. You found a way to kill the Hydra
Of Lerna, with its crowd of heads that ringed you.
Greetings, Jove’s new son, true god in your glory.
Come to your ritual with happy omens.”
Such were the exploits that they sang—above all
The cave and fire-­breathing Cacus in it.
The whole woods echoed, and the hills resounded.
The rites were over. Everyone returned

289–­twin snakes: Jealous of her husband’s affair, Juno sent snakes to kill the
infant Hercules in his cradle.
290–­Oechalia and Troy: Two cities
sacked by Hercules.
291–93–­King Eurystheus . . . spite
of Juno: Driven mad by Juno, Hercules
killed his wife and son and was ordered
to perform his Twelve Labors for King
Eurystheus as penance. The speech that
follows touches on several of them.
294– ­cloud-­born Centaurs: See
7.674n.
295–­Cretan beast . . . Nemean lion:
The Cretan beast was a wild bull sent by

290

295

300

305

Neptune; the hide of the Nemean lion
could not be pierced by any weapon.
These were two of Hercules’ Twelve
Labors.
296–­Hades’ guard: Cerberus. One
of the Labors was to fetch him from the
Underworld.
298–­Typhoeus: One of the Giants;
Hercules fought the Giants when they
attacked the Olympian gods.
299–300 Hydra of Lerna: The
hundred-­headed Hydra grew two new
heads for each head cut off; during one
of the Labors, Hercules cauterized each
stump when he cut off the head.

. 212 .

BOOK 8
Into the city. Slowed by age, the king
Kept his son and Aeneas close beside him
And spoke of various things to ease the walk.
Aeneas gazed all over, much impressed.
For everything he had an eager question,
And learned of what the men of old had left there.
Rome’s fortress builder, King Evander, told him,
“The native fauns and nymphs once shared this forest
With men, a tribe born out of flinty oak trunks—
Primitive, ignorant of yoking oxen,
And how to gather goods and how to keep them.
The trees and savage hunting gave them food.
Saturn was first to come, a kingly exile
Running from high Olympus and Jove’s violence.
This race, untaught and scattered in high mountains,
He brought together under law and called it
“Latin” from “latent” safety in this country.
Under this king the age that they call Golden
Arrived, and in great peace he ruled the people,
Till slowly a degraded age came on
With its war frenzy and its burning greed.
Then came Ausonians, and Sicanian tribes—
The land of Saturn often changed its name.
There were kings, such as giant, cruel King Thybris,
After whom we Italians call this river.
The Albula has lost its ancient name.
All-­ruling Fortune, fate with no escape,
319–­Saturn: Jupiter deposed his
father Saturn, who is said to have gone
into exile in Latium.
323–­
“Latin” from “latent”: Vergil links “Latin” with the verb lateo, “lie
hidden,” because Saturn lay hidden in
Latium from his son Jupiter.

310

315

320

325

330

324–­the age that they call Golden:
An idyllic early period of human existence, the first and best in a series of progressively declining ages; Silver, Bronze,
and Iron followed.
330–­giant, cruel King Thybris: His
name may connect with the Greek word
hybris, “violence.”

. 213 .

BOOK 8
Apollo’s mandate and the nymph Carmentis
My mother’s fearsome warnings sent me here,
An exile to the ocean’s farthest edge.”
Not pausing, he went on and showed the altar
And gate the Romans gave the name Carmental:
This was an early honor for Carmentis,
Who first claimed future glory for the line
Aeneas sired, and for Pallanteum.
In this large grove would be fierce Romulus’
Asylum. Chill cliffs roofed the Lupercal,
Named for Arcadia’s Lycaean Pan.
He showed the sacred grove, the Argiletum,
And told how Argus, though a guest, was killed there.
Tarpeia’s Rock rose, and the Capitol—
Gold now, then overgrown with forest brambles.
That cliff and woods made rustics quake already:
They felt a deadly power in the place.
“A god (but which?) lives in this grove, this hummock
Topped with leaves,” said the king. “Arcadians
Think they see Jove himself here often, shaking
His dusky aegis, summoning the storm clouds.

334– ­Carmentis: The mother of
Evander, worshipped in Rome as a goddess of prophecy and childbirth.
342–43–­Romulus’ asylum: The “asy‑
lum” on the Capitoline Hill, where Romu­
lus invited the dispossessed from other
nations to live.
343–44–­Lupercal, named for Arca­
dia’s Lycaean Pan: A cave of the god Lupercus at the foot of the Palantine Hill,
where the wolf that reared Romulus and
Remus was said to have lived; Pan’s epithet “Lycaeus” means “wolfish” in Greek.
345–­Argiletum: Literally “death of

335

340

345

350

Argus”; Argus was a Greek who plotted
to kill his host Evander but instead was
killed by Evander’s subjects.
347–­Tarpeia’s Rock: Steep cliff on
the Capitoline Hill, named after Tarpeia, who betrayed the Romans in their
war with the Sabines. Especially notorious criminals were thrown off it to their
deaths.
348–­Gold now, then overgrown with
forest brambles: The Capitoline Hill
was the location of the temple of Jupiter
Optimus Maximus, restored with gilding
by Augustus in 26 BCE.

. 214 .

BOOK 8
But these two towns with ruined walls you see
Are records left of men who came before.
Old Janus built this fort, Janiculum,
And Saturn this one, called Saturnia.”
They then moved toward Evander’s simple home;
His lowing cattle ranged on what is now
Rome’s Forum and the elegant Carinae.
They reached the house. “Hercules stooped inside
And found this palace big enough,” the king said.
“Friend, scorn wealth boldly; you too must be ready
For godhead—come, don’t sneer at my poor home.”
Beneath the narrow roof he led Aeneas,
A towering man, and placed him on a couch
Of leaves; a Libyan bearskin lay across it.
Night fell, embracing earth in her dark wings.

355

Venus’ maternal terror had its reasons:
Laurentum threatened, shameless tumult spread.
These words to her spouse, Vulcan, in their bedroom
Of gold breathed supernatural passion through him.
“While the Greek kings pressed on to pillage Troy,
Whose citadel would fall in fated flames.
I asked no help, no weapon from your art
For the poor things, dear husband. I had no wish
To see your work and trouble go for nothing—
Though I owed much to Priam’s sons and often
Cried for the bitter hardships of Aeneas.
Now Jove’s will sets him on Rutulian shores.

370

357–­Janiculum: The hill across the
Tiber.
358–­Saturnia: On the Capitoline
Hill.
361–­Rome’s Forum and the elegant

360

365

375

380

Carinae: The Forum was the center of
urban life in Rome; Carinae was a Roman district named for some of its buildings, which looked like the keels of ships
(carinae).

. 215 .

BOOK 8
I ask your holy honored self for arms,
A mother for her son. Nereus’ daughter,
Tithonus’ wife—they wept and won you over.
I see tribes massing, gates shut, iron sharpened
Against me, to eradicate my people.”
He wavered. Tenderly the goddess wrapped him
In her white arms and fondled him. In no time
He took in the familiar flame. The old heat
Ran through his bones and shook him to the marrow,
As when a streak of flame, ripped loose by thunder,
Flashes and shoots through clouds with its intense light.
His wife was glad—her tricks and beauty worked.
Bound in eternal love, the great god spoke:
“Why far-­fetched pretexts? You had faith in me
In the past, Goddess. Had you wanted it
Back then, I would have rightly armed the Trojans,
Since neither fate nor the almighty father
Had outlawed ten more years for Troy and Priam.
But if you’re now preparing for a war,
Whatever help my skill and care can promise,
Anything that the force of fire and bellows
Can make from melted iron and electrum
Is yours. Don’t plead for it and doubt your powers.”
He then made tender love to her and melted
Into sweet slumber in his wife’s embrace.
But when he woke from his first sleep, and Night
Had finished half her course—the hour a woman
Who makes a flimsy living from her craft
Of spinning wakes the sleeping ashes, adding
Night hours to work, with slaves kept at their long tasks
By firelight, to bring up her little children
383–84–­Nereus’ daughter, Tithonus’
wife: Thetis, mother of Achilles, and the
dawn goddess Aurora, mother of Mem-

385

390

395

400

405

410

non, had persuaded Vulcan to forge arms
for their sons.

. 216 .

BOOK 8
And guard her marriage bed from any shame:
At that hour, and as tirelessly, the fire god
Rose from his soft bed to his craft. An island
Rears high, with smoking cliffs, beside the coast
Of Sicily and Aeolian Lipari.
Dug underneath it are the caves of Etna
For the loud forges of the Cyclops clan.
The anvils boom and echo with strong blows,
Dipped iron squeals, and forges roar with fire
In Vulcan’s house, in the land named for him.
From the sky’s heights the fire god came, to find
His workers beating iron in that vast cave:
Brontes, Steropes, half-­stripped Pyracmon.
They had in hand a new-­forged thunderbolt,
Part perfect, part unfinished, such as Zeus
The father hurls to earth in lavish numbers.
On it they put three shafts of twisted rain,
Three each of wet cloud, red flame, winged South Wind,
And then mixed lightning in, and noise, and terror,
And added wrath with its pursuing fires.
Others worked hard at Mars’ winged chariot
For stirring soldiers, for inciting cities;
Others were busy at the ghastly aegis,
Armor of Pallas in her rage. They polished
The gold scales and the snake-­twined, wild-­eyed head—
The Gorgon who adorned the goddess’ breastplate.
“Get rid of all this, Cyclops race of Etna,
And start this new work,” Vulcan told them now.
415–17–­An island . . . Lipari: The
island Hiera, modern Marettimo, off the
western coast of Sicily.
422–­the land named for him: The
island named “Volcani insula” (Vulcan’s
island) is sometimes identified with
modern Hiera.

415

420

425

430

435

440

425–­Brontes, Steropes, . . . Pyrac­
mon: In Greek their names mean “lightning,” “thunder,” and “fire anvil.”
438–­The Gorgon: Medusa, the fe‑
male monster whose severed head was
part of the aegis (shield or breastplate)
of Minerva.

. 217 .

BOOK 8
“A man with heart needs weapons. You need strength
And quick hands, and your craft’s full mastery.
Hurry!” He said no more. All swiftly bent
To work, dividing it in equal shares.
Soon rivulets of bronze and gold were flowing.
Wound-­making steel was melting in the huge forge.
They formed a giant shield, with seven disks
Bound into layers fit to meet the weapons
Of all the Latins. Some pump windy bellows,
Others dip hissing bronze work in the basin.
The cavern groans with blows on steady anvils.
Alternately they raise their mighty arms
In rhythm; with tight tongs they turn the ingots.
Aeolian Vulcan hurried on this work,
As tender light and birdsong from the eaves
Wakened Evander in his simple home.
The old man rose, tied on Etruscan sandals,
Draped himself in a tunic, hung a sword belt
And an Arcadian sword from his right shoulder,
While from the other swept a panther skin.
Down from the doorstep two dogs came with him
And closely paced before their master’s steps.
He sought his guest Aeneas’ quarters, thinking—
The good man—of their talk and what he’d promised.
Aeneas too rose early; with Achates
He went to meet Evander and his son.
The men clasped hands and seated in the courtyard,
Finally found a chance for a discussion.
The king began:
“Great Trojan chief, as long as you’re alive,
I’d never call the power of Troy defeated.
We can give little help to match your glory.
The Tiber blocks us on one side. The other

. 218 .

445

450

455

460

465

470

BOOK 8
Clangs with Rutulian weapons at our walls.
But I propose to join vast nations to you,
And armed camps rich with empire; chance has given
Relief unlooked-­for; fate has called you here.
Not far off, on its ancient stone foundation,
Is Argylla. War-­renowned Lydians
Settled there long ago, on Tuscan uplands
And throve for many years. Mezentius
Then came to rule by force, a brazen tyrant.
Unspeakable, his butcheries, his frenzies.
Gods, bring the same to him—and to his children.
He even tied dead bodies onto live ones,
Hands against hands and faces against faces—
His special torture. In this grim embrace,
His victims slowly died, in liquid rot.
At last his people, worn down by his riots
Of horrors, placed his household under siege,
Shot his roof full of flame and killed his henchmen.
Mezentius escaped, though, and took refuge
Among Rutulian arms, as Turnus’ guest-­friend.
Now all Etruria rose in rightful anger,
Calling for his return, on pain of war.
I’ll give you to these thousands as a leader.
Their vessels pack the shore, the soldiers clamor
For battle; an old augur’s prophecies
Hold them back. ‘Chosen youth of Lydia,
Brave flower of an ancient warrior tribe,
Driven by just rage at Mezentius’ crimes!
You must not serve a man of Italy.
Wait for a foreigner.’ The Tuscan army
Has not marched on, in fear of heaven’s warning.
479–­Argylla . . . Lydians: Argylla is
the Etruscan city of Caere. The Etrus-

475

480

485

490

495

500

cans were said to come from Lydia, in
Asia Minor.

. 219 .

BOOK 8
Tarchon himself sent legates to deliver
The crown and rod of kingship and a summons
To camp, where I could take up Tuscan rule.
But weary old age, slow and cold, denies me
Command; my strength for daring now lies sluggish.
I’d urge my son, but he’s a part of this land:
His mother’s Sabine. Fate approves your age
And lineage. Heaven calls you. Come, begin,
Heroic Trojan and Italian leader.
I’ll even lend my only joy and comfort,
Pallas—you’ll be his guide. From your example,
He’ll grow accustomed to Mars’ heavy work.
Let him from early youth hold you in awe.
Two hundred chosen knights, rock of my army,
I’ll give him, and he’ll give you just as many
In his own name.” Anchises’ son Aeneas
And trustworthy Achates kept their eyes down.
Sad-­hearted, they turned many harsh thoughts over—
But Venus gave a portent up above.
Astonishingly, lightning flashed from heaven,
And thunder boomed, as if the sky were falling;
And like a Tuscan horn the high air sounded.
They looked up, and the blaring blasts continued.
In calm clear sky, between the clouds they saw
Weapons glow red; they clashed like thunderclaps.
It stunned them all—except the Trojan hero,
Who knew the sound, pledge of his goddess mother.
“Guest-­friend,” he said, “these signs allow no doubt:
Olympus calls me. My immortal mother
505–­Tarchon: Founder of the Etruscan town Tarquinii, and an ally of Aeneas.
511–­Sabine: The Sabines were native
Italians, so although Evander is Greek,
his son is not fully “foreign.”

505

510

515

520

525

530

515–­your example: Role models were
central to Roman thought.
524–25–­
lightning . . . thunder:
Thunder and lightning in a clear sky signified an extremely important omen.

. 220 .

BOOK 8
Promised this sign, a covenant for wartime,
And said she’d bring me weapons made by Vulcan
Down through the air.
The slaughter waiting for the poor Laurentians!
The punishment for Turnus! All the helmets,
Shields, brave men’s bodies rolling in old Tiber!
Let them break treaties, let them have their war.”
He rose from his high seat. Hercules’ altar
Was smoldering; he stirred its ashes up,
Then cheerfully approached the lowly home gods
He knew from yesterday. Evander slaughtered
Chosen sheep; Troy’s young men performed the same rite.
Returning to his ships and friends, Aeneas
Chose all the ablest men to follow him
To war; the others glided with the fleet
Slackly downriver to Ascanius
With news of how things stood, and of his father.
The Trojans headed for the Tuscan plains
Were given mounts; Aeneas’ special one
Wore a sand-­colored gold-­clawed lion pelt.
Suddenly Rumor flew all through the small town:
Horsemen were speeding to the Tuscan camp.
Over and over mothers prayed: their terror
Grew with the danger, and Mars’ specter grew.
Father Evander now took Pallas’ hand
In parting, and he couldn’t stop his tears.
“If only Jove restored my youth and made me
Again the victor at Praeneste, throwing
The front ranks down, then burning heaps of shields—!
That day I sent King Erulus to Hades,
Feronia, his mother, gave him three lives—
561–­Praeneste: modern Palestrina, in
the Apennines, not far from Rome.

. 221 .

535

540

545

550

555

560

BOOK 8
Monstrous—and triple weapons for attack.
He had to be cut down three times; I took
Each soul from him, three times I stripped his weapons.
My former self would not be torn from you,
My child; Mezentius would not insult me,
His neighbor, with so much barbaric slaughter
And a town widowed of so many townsmen.
You, gods above, and your great governor
Jupiter, pity an Arcadian king,
And hear a father’s prayer. If your divine power
And fate will keep my Pallas safe for me,
And if I live to see him face to face,
I beg to live, no matter what I suffer.
But if you threaten the unspeakable,
Then, Fortune, break my wretched life off now,
While fears are unconfirmed, hope arguable,
While you, dear son, sole pleasure of my old age,
Are in my arms, and no hard news is wounding
My ears.” The father, at the last farewell,
Poured out these words, and swooned. Slaves took him home.

565

The cavalry had passed the gates: Aeneas
And staunch Achates in the leading rank,
Then other Trojan nobles; in the middle
Went Pallas in a vivid cloak and armor;
As, soaked in Ocean’s waters, Lucifer,
Whom Venus loves above all other stars,
Raises his sacred face and melts the darkness.
Up on the wall stood frightened mothers, gazing
After the dust cloud and the bronze-­bright squadrons.
These marched off in their armor through the brush,
The closest way. A shout rose from the column.

585

589–­Lucifer: The Morning Star, literally “Light Bearer.”

. 222 .

570

575

580

590

595

BOOK 8
Horses’ hooves rumbled on the loose-­earthed plain.
There is a forest near cool Caere’s stream,
Widely held sacred by an old tradition.
Hills covered in black firs encircle it.
They say the old Greeks, first to live in Latium,
Made this a shrine, with its own holy day,
For the god ruling fields and herds, Silvanus.
Tarchon and his Etruscans pitched their tents
In a safe site nearby. A hilltop view
Showed the whole army camped across the plain.
Father Aeneas and his picked troops came here
Tired, cared for their mounts, and ate and rested.
Snowy-­white holy Venus brought her presents
Through heaven’s clouds. Far off, she saw her son
In a secluded valley, by a cold stream.
She went straight up to him and spoke these words:
“My husband’s gifts are finished, with the skill
He pledged. So don’t hang back from challenging
The arrogant Laurentians or fierce Turnus.”
Then the Cytherean embraced her son,
And set the gleaming arms beneath the oak.
The goddess’ gift—the honor of it—thrilled him.
He couldn’t fill his gaze with every piece.
With awe he picked them up and turned them over:
The fearsome helmet with its flaming crest,
The deadly sword, the blood-­red corselet stiff
With bronze—enormous, like a cloud, blue-­shaded
But kindling with the sky’s far-­stretching rays;
Then the smooth greaves of forged gold and electrum,

597–­Caere: The Etruscan city where
Mezentius had ruled.
602–­Silvanus: A woodland god.
615–­the Cytherean: The island
Cythera was sacred to Venus.

600

605

610

615

620

616–­the gleaming arms: The “Shield
of Aeneas” section is Vergil’s adaptation
of Homer’s famous description of the
shield of Achilles in Iliad 18.

. 223 .

BOOK 8
The spear, the shield—work beyond all description.
There the fire god had etched Italian history
And Roman triumphs, from the prophecies
He knew: Ascanius’ whole line to come,
And every war the clan would fight, in sequence.
There lay a mother wolf, in Mars’ green grotto.
Playful twin boys were hanging on her teats,
Fearlessly suckling on their foster-­mother.
She arched her neck above the pair and licked
Either in turn, to shape them with her tongue.
Beside this he’d put Rome, and Sabine women
Snatched—such a lawless act—from crowded stands
At the Great Games. Old Tatius, with his stern folk
Of Cures, warred again with Romulus
And his settlers. It was over then: the two kings
Stood before armed Jove’s altar, holding bowls,
Their treaty hallowed by a slaughtered sow.
Next, chariot teams tore Mettus limb from limb
(You should have kept your promise, man of Alba);
The liar’s guts were scattered through the woods
By Tullus—blood dew spattered bramble bushes.

626–­the fire god: Vulcan.
626–27–­Italian history and Roman
triumphs: Vergil concentrates on early
Roman legend then moves rapidly to the
contemporary Battle of Actium, omitting
many notable events, including the invasion of Hannibal.
630–31–­a mother wolf, . . . playful
twin boys: Romulus and Remus, the
former being the founder of Rome. Sons
of Mars, they were suckled by a she-­wolf
in the Lupercal: see 8.343–44n.
635–36–­
Sabine women snatched:
Facing a shortage of women, early Ro-

625

630

635

640

645

man men abducted local Sabine women
and married them, an event referred to as
the rape of the Sabine women.
637–38–­Tatius, with his stern folk of
Cures: Tatius was the king of the Sabines
who went to war with Romulus, the first
king of Rome; Cures was a Sabine town.
642–45–­chariot teams tore Mettus
limb from limb . . . Tullus: Mettus Fufetius, ruler of Alba Longa, wavered in
supporting Rome in battle; the third Roman king, Tullius Hostilius, condemned
him to be torn apart by horses driven in
opposite directions.

. 224 .

BOOK 8
Porsenna ordered Rome to take back Tarquin,
And with a massive force besieged the city.
Aeneas’ people dashed to arms, for freedom.
You saw the threat and anger on his face—
When Cocles dared to tear the bridge apart
And Cloelia broke her chains and swam the river.
Near the shield’s top was Manlius, who guarded
Tarpeia’s heights, the Capitol and temple;
Romulus’ palace still had bristling fresh thatch.
In the gold portico a silver goose,
Flapping and calling, warned that Gauls had come.
Stealing up through the brush, they’d reached the stronghold,
Protected by the favor of dark Night.
Their hair was shaggy gold, their clothes were gold,
Their striped cloaks shone, around their milky necks
Were twists of gold; each rattled in his hand
Two Alpine pikes; long shields were their protection.
From the god’s hammer Salii had leapt,
And naked Luperci, wool caps, shields fallen
Out of the sky. In dainty carts chaste matrons
646–­Porsenna: The Etruscan king
Lars Porsenna besieged Rome after the
Romans deposed their last king, Tarquinius Superbus, who was of Etruscan origin. He was impressed by several Roman
acts of bravery, described below.
650– ­Cocles: Horatius Cocles, who
single-­
handedly held a bridge during
Porsenna’s initial attack.
651– ­Cloelia: A Roman hostage of
Porsenna who escaped his camp by
swimming across the Tiber
652–­Manlius: A Roman general who
in 390 BCE with a small contingent of
soldiers held off the Gauls’ attack on
Rome via the Tarpeian Rock (8.347n.).
654–­Romulus’ palace still had bris­

650

655

660

665

tling fresh thatch: The thatched house
of Romulus on the Capitoline Hill, a historical monument in Vergil’s time.
655–­silver goose: Manlius was
alerted to the Gauls’ night attack on the
Capitoline Hill by the honking of the
sacred geese.
663–­Salii: See 8.285n.
664–­Luperci: Priests of Lupercus,
a fertility god, whose festival was celebrated by the Luperci running half-­
naked through the streets striking people
with goads; see 8.343–44n.
664–65–­
shields fallen out of the
sky: Sacred shields were believed to have
fallen from the sky during the reign of
Numa.

. 225 .

BOOK 8
Brought holy objects through the town. Far off
Were Dis’ high gates, the settlement of Hades
Where crimes are punished. From a looming cliff
Catiline hangs and quivers at the Furies.
The good live elsewhere; Cato makes their laws.
A picture of the swollen sea, in gold,
Wound through these scenes and billowed, foaming white.
Bright silver dolphins circled in the rim’s spume
And swept the surface with their tails. The fleets,
Braced with bronze, were lined up at Actium
In the shield’s center. All of Leucata
Was seething with them. Gold shone on the waves.
Caesar Augustus led the Roman forces—
Senate and people, hearth gods, mighty sky gods.
High on the stern he stood; from his glad forehead
Poured two flames. From his head his father’s star rose.
Elsewhere Agrippa—gods and winds both helped him—
Led the line from on high, bright naval ship beaks
Crowning him proudly. Antony, the victor
Over the Eastern lands, over the Red Sea,
Brought foreign wealth and motley troops against them.
Egypt, and Eastern power, and farthest Bactra
669– ­Catiline: Lucius Sergius Catilina, a patrician who in 63 BCE plotted
to overthrow the Roman Republic before
being exposed by the consul Cicero.
670–­Cato: Cato the Younger, a proponent of Stoic philosophy who was
known for his moral integrity.
676–­Leucata: Site of the Battle of Actium; see 3.280n.
678– ­Caesar Augustus: At the time
he was still named Octavian; he would
not be given the title of Augustus until
27 BCE.
680–­High on the stern he stood:
In the Latin, exactly the same phrase is

670

675

680

685

used to describe Anchises at 3.526–27 and
Aeneas at 10.261, thus linking Augustus
with his claimed ancestors.
682–­Agrippa: Marcus Vipsanius
Agrippa, Augustus’ admiral, who was
largely responsible for the victory at Actium.
684–­Antony, the victor: Antony had
recently led successful campaigns against
the Parthians.
687–­Egypt: The last of the Roman
civil wars occurred when Antony, previously Octavian’s ally, took up arms
against Rome after the Senate declared
war on his lover Cleopatra.

. 226 .

BOOK 8
Were in his train, and his Egyptian wife
Followed him—outrage! Now the navies clashed.
Beaks, backed oars, triple spikes churned sea to foam.
To the deep! You’d imagine Delos torn loose
And floating, or high mountains smashed together:
Men moved to battle on such towering sterns.
Oakum in flames and iron weapons soared.
Neptune’s fields reddened. In the midst the queen
Rallied her ranks, shaking her country’s sistrum—
Not seeing yet the two snakes etched behind her.
The dog Anubis and all sorts of beast gods
Faced off with Venus, Neptune, and Minerva;
And Mars raged in the center of the battle,
Engraved in iron; grisly Furies hovered,
Discord stalked in a tattered robe, contented.
Bellona followed with her bloody whip.
From his high cliff-­top shrine Apollo saw,
And aimed his bow. Egyptians, Indians,
Arabs, Sabaeans turned and fled in terror.
The queen was pictured calling on the winds
And just then slacking ropes to spread the sails.
The smith god made her pale among the slaughter.
She faced her death; the waves and the northwester
Swept her along. The mighty Nile, in mourning,
Opened his arms and giant cloak and beckoned
688–89–­His Egyptian wife . . . out­
rage!: As Cleopatra was a foreigner, her
affair with Antony was not a lawful Roman marriage.
691–­Delos: That is, the ships were so
large they appeared to be islands. For Delos as a “free-­floating” island, see 3.73n.
696–­sistrum: An Egyptian musical
instrument resembling a rattle.
697–­two snakes: Cleopatra will later
commit suicide by asp bite.

690

695

700

705

710

698–­Anubis and all sorts of beast
gods: Anubis was a dog-­headed Egyptian god. The animal components of
Egyptian deities seemed bizarre to
Romans.
704–­cliff-­top shrine: Apollo had a
temple at Actium.
709–­The smith god: Vulcan.

. 227 .

BOOK 8
The conquered to retreat to his blue delta.
Caesar rode into Rome in triple triumph
And gave our gods their holy lasting payment:
Three hundred towering shrines throughout the city.
Streets roared with celebration and applause.
Offerings filled the temples, mothers danced,
And slaughtered calves were sprawled before the altars.
Sitting at shining Phoebus’ snowy threshold,
He viewed the nations’ gifts and had them mounted
On the proud doors. All kinds of clothing, weapons,
And languages filed by in captive order:
Leleges, Carians, loose-­robed Africans,
Nomads, Gelonian archers. The Euphrates
Walked with meek waves; the two-­horned Rhine walked by;
Remote Morini, Dahae now first conquered,
And the Araxes, fuming at his new bridge.
Aeneas, thrilled by Vulcan’s scenic shield,
His mother’s gift, knew nothing of the stories.
He shouldered his descendants’ glorious fate.

714–­
in triple triumph: Augustus
held a three-­
day triumph in 29 BCE
when he returned to Rome.
716–­
Three
hundred
towering
shrines: Augustus consecrated many
temples and shrines during his lifetime.
720–21–­Phoebus’ snowy threshold,
he viewed the nations’ gifts: Octavian

715

720

725

730

sits on the marble portico of the temple
of Apollo on the Palatine.
725–28–­Euphrates . . . Araxes: Rivers
representing various peoples conquered
by the Romans; in triumphal processions rivers were depicted as chained
river deities.

. 228 .

BOOK 9

While, far away, all this was happening,
Iris came earthward, sent by Saturn’s daughter
To Turnus, who was seated in a hollow,
The sanctum of his ancestor Pilumnus.
Rosy-­lipped Thaumas’ child addressed him: “Turnus,
Circling time, on its own, brings you an answer
To prayers—no god would venture it: Aeneas
Has left behind his fort, his fleet, his comrades
For Palatine Evander’s kingly home.
He’s ventured on to Corythus’ far cities
To gather Lydian farmers and equip them.
Why waver? Call for chariots and horses.
Don’t hold back: overrun the camp and take it.”
On poised wings, she rose skyward, and a great arc
Was cut beneath the clouds as she retreated.
The young man knew her, and he raised both hands
To heaven, calling these words after her:
“Iris, great splendor of the sky, who sent you
Down through the clouds? Why is the air so bright
Just now? I see the sky split in the middle—
Stars wander at its height. Whoever’s great signs
Call me to arms, I follow.” He went down
To take up water from the current’s surface
And overwhelmed the gods above with prayers.

2–­Iris: The rainbow goddess.
4–­Pilumnus: An Italian god and
grandfather of Turnus.
5–­Thaumas: A sea deity.

5

10

15

20

10–11–­Corythus . . . Lydian farmers:
The Etruscans were said to come from
Cortona in Lydia (Asia Minor).

. 229 .

BOOK 9
Now the whole army crossed the open plains,
Wealthy in horses, gold, embroidery;
Messapus marshaled the front ranks, the sons
Of Tyrrhus had the rear, the center Turnus,
Wheeling with weapons, taller by a head—
As the calm Ganges swells from the infusions
Of seven smooth streams; as the Nile’s rich floods
Ebb from the plains and hide beneath the banks.
The Trojans suddenly saw black dust massing
Far away, darkness welling on the plain.
From a high mound Caïcus gave the warning:
“Citizens, what’s that murky roiling round thing?
Quick—bring your swords and spears and man the walls.
They’re here!” The Trojans hollered and sought shelter
Through every gate, and crowded on the ramparts;
Such were the parting orders of Aeneas,
The able general: that if something happened,
They must not take the field and risk a battle,
But stay on bastions and defensive mounds.
Though shame and anger counseled them to fight,
They shut the gates, as ordered, armed themselves,
And braced for the attack in hollow towers.
Turnus, with twenty chosen horsemen trailing,
Flew past his slow front line and reached the town,
To its alarm. He rode a dappled horse
From Thrace, and wore a gold, red-­crested helmet.
“Young men, who’ll join me in the first assault?
Look—” And he whirled his spear up through the air
To start the fight; he loomed, he plunged ahead.

29–­The line is thought to be spurious.
30–31–­
Ganges . . . seven smooth
streams: The Romans believed the River
Ganges split into seven channels.

25

30

35

40

45

50

31–­Nile’s rich floods: Every year the
Nile flooded its banks in the summer,
then receded.

. 230 .

BOOK 9
His men took up the shout—they followed him
With chilling roars, contemptuous of the Trojans.
Why not fight man to man, out on the level?
Why hunch inside? The agitated general
Rode back and forth but couldn’t find a gap;
As a wolf prowls outside a crowded sheepfold
And growls at every chink. The wind and rain
Of midnight lash him. Lambs beneath their mothers
Huddle and bleat and bleat. Though he can’t reach them,
He lunges in wild rage, lashed on by hunger
Grown into frenzy, by his blood-­starved throat.
So the Rutulian scanned the camp’s defenses,
Seared to the bone by anger and frustration.
How could he break in? What assault would scatter
The Trojans out across the level ground?
Their fleet lay snug, moored right beside the camp,
Closed in by earthworks and the flowing river.
There he struck, calling to his cheering comrades,
“Torches!”—and hectically snatched burning pine.
They set to work, with Turnus there to goad them.
Soon all the troops laid hold of sooty weapons,
Looting the fires; pitchy smoky light spread,
And Vulcan sent the sparks clear up to heaven.
Muse, say what god it was that saved the Trojans,
Beating the fierce flames from their ships. The ancients
Vouched for the story, and it still endures.
Back when Aeneas, high on Phrygian Ida,
Began to build a fleet to sail the deep,
The Berecynthian mother of the gods,
They say, told great Jove, “You’re Olympus’ lord,
So grant what your dear mother begs from you.
82–­
Berecynthian mother of the
gods: Cybele; Berecynthus is a mountain in her native Phrygia.

. 231 .

55

60

65

70

75

80

BOOK 9
For many years I had a cherished forest
On a high peak, a place of offerings,
Shadowed with black pitch pines and maple trees.
Gladly I gave it to the youthful Trojan
Who had to have a fleet, but now I’m anxious.
Free me from fear: grant what your mother begs,
That whirlwinds never shatter and submerge them
On any voyage. Please—they are from my mountains.”
Her son, who guides creation’s stars, replied,
“Mother, what favor have you asked of fate?
Could it be right for ships a mortal made
To last forever? Should Aeneas’ perils
Bring him no risk? What god has so much power?
But when they’ve done their work and reached a harbor
In Italy, each that survived the sea
To bring the Trojan chieftain to Laurentum
I’ll strip of earthly form and make a goddess
Of the great ocean, like the Nereids Doto
And Galatea breasting through the sea foam.”
He swore this by the Styx, his brother’s stream—
Black eddies, pitch that seethes along the banks.
He nodded, and Olympus shook. The Fates
Had rounded out the time; the promised day
Had come. The torches flung by Turnus roused
The Mother to defend her sacred ships.
A strange light flashed; a great cloud from the east
Appeared to dart across the sky, with bands
Of devotees. A fearsome voice fell earthward
And filled the Trojan and Rutulian ranks:
“Don’t take up arms or anxiously defend
My ships. It will be sooner granted Turnus
To burn the sea than holy pines. Be free,
102–­Nereids: Sea nymphs.
104–­
his brother’s stream: Pluto,

85

90

95

100

105

110

115

Jupiter’s brother, is god of the Underworld.

. 232 .

BOOK 9
Sea goddesses, my daughters: I command it.”
Right away, on their own, they broke their moorings
And headed for the bottom, dolphinlike.
Though bronze-­prowed ships a moment earlier
Had stood along the shore, girls’ bodies rose
And skimmed the sea—it was a miracle.
This staggered the Rutulians, and Messapus
Himself took flight behind his rearing team.
The Tiber, roaring, pulled its stream upriver.
But cocksure Turnus’ nerve held even then.
He stung his friends to action with this speech:
“These signs are for the Trojans. Jove himself
Arrived before our fire and spears, and tore
Their old support from them. The sea is closed now.
They can’t get out, with that part of creation
Taken away, the land ours, armed Italians
In thousands here. The holy oracles
These easterners allege don’t frighten me.
The fates and Venus have their due. The Trojans
Landed in fertile Italy. My fate
Is slashing this vile race away. My wife
Is stolen. Not just Atreus’ sons suffered;
Not just Mycenae took up righteous arms.
‘Troy fell once—that’s enough.’ Their crime before this
Should be enough. By now they ought to loathe
All women! For their courage they rely
On palisades and ditches that delay
Death by mere moments. But they saw Troy’s walls
Collapse in flames, though Neptune was the builder.
Which of you picked troops is prepared to splinter

137–­My wife: In his indignation Turnus refers to his fiancée, Lavinia, as his
wife.
138–39–­Atreus’ sons . . . Mycenae:

120

125

130

135

140

145

Agamemnon, king of Mycenae, and
Menelaus, commanders of the Greeks,
who sacked Troy to retrieve Menelaus’
wife, Helen, abducted by Paris.

. 233 .

BOOK 9
The walls and swarm the quaking camp with me?
A thousand ships or Vulcan’s arms, who needs them?
They’ve found Etruscan allies—good. They’ve got
No sneaking tricks at night to fear from us,
As when Athena’s temple guards were slaughtered.
We won’t be lurking in a horse’s belly!
I’ll ring their walls with fire—in open daylight.
They won’t mistake us for the Greeks, whom Hector
Held back for ten years—no, I’ll set them straight.
But now the day is past the time for battle.
In what is left, be cheerful—you’ve done well.
Eat, rest, since there’s a fight to come, believe me.”
Messapus’ duty was to block the gates
With sentries and surround the wall with watch fires.
For the patrol, fourteen Rutulian captains
Were chosen, each to lead a hundred men
Arrayed in purple crests and shining armor.
They scattered to their different tasks or sprawled
Across the grass and drank their wine from bronze cups.
Fires formed a single glow. The watchmen gambled
Throughout the sleepless night.
Armed Trojans watched them from their walls above.
They anxiously checked gates and—still in armor—
Built gangways and defenses in a network,
Urged on by keen Serestus and Mnestheus:
Father Aeneas had appointed them
Leaders and generals in case of crisis.
The whole force on the walls took turns to guard
The risky posts assigned by lot. One sentry

148–­Vulcan’s arms: The shield of
Achilles, like that of Aeneas, was forged
by Vulcan.

150

155

160

165

170

175

151–­
Athena’s temple guards: Ajax
the Lesser and his soldiers took Athena’s
temple in Troy. The line is thought to be
spurious.

. 234 .

BOOK 9
Was Hyrtacus’ son Nisus, fierce in battle.
Nimble with arrows and a spear, he’d come
From Ida’s hunting grounds to serve Aeneas.
His friend Euryalus was lovelier
Than any other of Aeneas’ fighters.
On his unshaven cheeks were manhood’s first signs.
Love bound these two; they dashed to war together,
And now they shared a picket at the gate.
Nisus asked, “Is it gods who make me want this,
Or do we make our deadly urges gods?
A long time now I’ve thought of taking on
Some fight or other great thing—I’m so restless!
You see these overconfident Rutulians
At scattered glinting campfires. There they sprawl,
Melted by wine. It’s all so quiet. Listen
To what I might do—no, I’ve now decided.
Leaders and all, the whole camp wants Aeneas
To know what’s happened and return to help us.
For a pledged prize (to go to you—for me,
Glory’s enough) I’d find a way around
That ridge to reach the fort at Pallanteum.”
Euryalus, though overwhelmed by passion
For praise, was prompt in answering his fierce friend:
“You mean to bar me from this crucial mission,
And face the risk alone? That’s not the way
Opheltes, my war-­hardened father, raised me
In the Greek siege’s horrors, in our struggles
At Troy. And at your side have I been like that
In following Aeneas to fate’s edge?

176–79–­Nisus . . . Euryalus: The
night raid of Nisus and Euryalus that follows is modeled on Odysseus’ (Ulysses’)
similar escapade in Iliad 10. We saw the
two lovers in the footrace at 5.293–361.

196–­Pallanteum: Evander’s
which Aeneas visited in book 8.

. 235 .

180

185

190

195

200

city,

BOOK 9
I have contempt for daylight, and I count
The honor that you aim at worth my life.”
Nisus replied, “I couldn’t rightly doubt you.
So may great Jupiter or any fair judge
Of courage bring me back to you in triumph.
But if a god or mishap steals my life—
A thing you often see in such great dangers—
I’d want you living, since your youth deserves it.
And if my corpse is rescued or bought back,
You’d bury it; if fate denies those rites,
An empty tomb and gifts could honor me.
I wouldn’t bring such sorrow to your mother,
Since she, of all our mothers, followed you,
Indifferent to the walls of great Acestes.”
His friend rebutted this: “Empty excuses!
My mind is made up, nothing’s going to change it.
Let’s hurry”—and he woke the other sentries
To take the watch in turn. They left their post
And side by side strode off to find their king.
All other creatures on the earth were sleeping,
Their cares dissolved, no hardship in their minds.
The Trojan leaders, picked men in their prime,
Were meeting about vital strategy.
What should they do? Who’d bring Aeneas news?
In the camp’s central yard, they gripped their shields,
Leaned on their long spears. Now Euryalus
And Nisus pleaded for an urgent hearing:
This would be worth it. Iulus took the lead,
Welcomed the fervent youths, had Nisus speak.
Hyrtacus’ son began: “Friends of Aeneas,
Give us a thoughtful hearing; don’t regard
218–­Acestes: A Trojan leader who
had already settled in Sicily.

205

210

215

220

225

230

235

232–­Iulus took the lead: Although
Iulus must be only twelve years old, he
shows precocious leadership skills.

. 236 .

BOOK 9
Our age. Our enemies are sunk in silence
And wine and sleep. We’ve seen a gap to sneak through
Near the sea, where the road forks at the gate.
There the black smoke from scattered campfires rises
Clear to the stars. Just let us use this chance
To reach Aeneas at Pallanteum’s fort:
You’ll see us here again soon, with the spoils
Of a great slaughter. No, we won’t get lost:
From hidden valleys where we hunt, we’ve seen
The outskirts. The whole river is familiar.”
Aletes spoke, age-­burdened, ripe in judgment:
“Our fathers’ gods, forever ruling Troy,
You can’t mean to destroy us utterly:
You’ve given our young men such valiant spirits.”
Speaking, he turned to each and clasped their hands
And shoulders. Tears were gushing down his face.
“What prizes, warriors, could I think worthy
Of your heroics? Here’s the first and finest:
The gods’ approval; prompt rewards will come, too,
From good Aeneas and Ascanius.
The youngster won’t forget such vital service.”
The prince concurred. “Father’s return alone
Can save me. By our city’s great gods, Nisus,
Assaracus’ god, white-­haired Vesta’s shrine:
I’m trusting all my fortune, all my hopes
To you. Bring back my father, let me see him.
What can we fear when he’s with us? I’ll give you
Two well-­made silver cups, deeply embossed
(My father’s spoil from capturing Arisba),
Two tripods, two gold bars of standard weight,

246–­Aletes: A Trojan companion of
Aeneas, last seen at 1.122.
259–­Assaracus: The grandfather of
Anchises.

240

245

250

255

260

265

259–­Vesta: Goddess of the hearth.
264–­
My father’s spoil from cap­
turing Arisba: Nothing more is known
about the episode.

. 237 .

BOOK 9
An ancient wine bowl from Sidonian Dido.
And when Aeneas conquers Italy,
Claims kingship, and distributes all the spoils—
You saw the horse gold-­armored Turnus rode?
Nisus, I’ll set that beast aside for you;
The shield and red crest too are yours already.
Father will add his gifts: twelve hand-­picked slave girls,
All mothers, and twelve captives with their armor,
And King Latinus’ own estates besides.
You, honored boy, who’re closer to my own age,
With all my soul I’ll keep you as a friend
In everything I have to face, pursuing
No glory on my own account without you.
In peace and war, you’ll be my foremost comrade
And confidant.” Euryalus responded:
“No time will come that shows me less courageous
Than in this enterprise. If only luck
Won’t turn against me—but I ask one favor
Besides these. My poor mother, of the old race
Of Priam, wouldn’t stay behind in Troy
Or King Acestes’ fort, but came with me.
I’ve kept from her my plans, however risky,
And my good-­byes (your right hand and the night
Witness this), since I couldn’t bear her tears.
But you, assuage her loss, relieve her need.
If I believe you will, I’ll take my chances
More boldly.” These words struck the Trojans’ hearts.
They wept—and handsome Iulus most of all,
Wrung by the thought of how he loved his father.
He spoke:
“Be sure of everything this great task earns you:
She’ll be my mother, lacking just the name
Creusa—and get no small thanks for having
A son like you. However this turns out,
I swear it by this life my father swore on.

. 238 .

270

275

280

285

290

295

300

BOOK 9
My pledges, if you don’t return successful,
Are for your mother and your family.”
Weeping, he took the gold sword from his shoulders:
The wondrous skill of Knossian Lycaon
Had shaped the blade to fit an ivory scabbard.
Mnestheus’ hunting spoil, a lion’s rough pelt
Was Nisus’. Staunch Aletes traded helmets
With him. The armed youths set out; all the leaders,
Both old and young, stood praying at the gates:
Among them handsome Iulus, with the forethought
And duty of a man before his time,
Sent many messages, but might as well
Have given them to misty wind to scatter.
In shadowed night, they crossed the moats and sought
The hostile camp: many would die before them.
Randomly on the grass men sprawled in wine’s sleep,
And chariots stood upright on the shore.
Among the reins and weapons, wheels and wine jars
Soldiers were lying. Nisus broke the silence:
“This is our chance to strike, Euryalus.
Come on this way, and look around and guard me;
Make certain no one follows where we go.
I’ll lead you on a broad path—which I’ll empty.”
He checked his voice and made his way to Rhamnes
The proud, who happened to be snoring loudly
In slumber, propped up on a pile of blankets:
A prophet, Turnus’ friend, a king himself;
But prophecy would not prevent his death.
Three slaves were slumped among the weapons; Nisus
Stifled them; also Remus’ page and driver
Under the team, whose drooping necks he cut,
304–­Knossian Lycaon: Otherwise
unknown, but Cretans were renowned
for their craftsmanship.

. 239 .

305

310

315

320

325

330

BOOK 9
Then lopped their owner’s head and left the body
Sobbing out blood: warm, black, it soaked the bed
And ground. He then killed Lamyrus and Lamus
And handsome young Serranus, who’d stayed up
To gamble, and lay beaten by the wine god—
Too much for him. It would have been more lucky
For him to go on gambling until dawn.
Nisus was like a famished lion raging
In crowded sheep pens, gnashing, dragging soft beasts
In their mute terror, roaring with his red mouth.
Euryalus blazed just as fiercely, killing.
Rank-­and-­file soldiers never saw him coming—
Fadus, Herbesus, Abaris, and Rhoetus—
No, Rhoetus was awake through all of it,
And shrank in fear behind a giant wine jar.
He rose to fight; from close at hand a sword
Thrust to the hilt and came out, dripping death.
He spewed his soul in wine-­stained purple blood.
His killer carried on, in eager stealth.
Now he was making toward Messapus’ camp—
Its dying outer fires, its horses tethered,
Cropping the grass. But Nisus, when he sensed
The boy’s blood-­greed grow out of bound, spoke curtly:
“We need to stop. Light’s coming and could catch us.
We’ve hit them hard and made our way beyond them.”
They left behind there many splendid weapons
Of silver, mixing bowls, and lovely fabrics.
Euryalus took Rhamnes’ gold-­bossed sword belt
And badges. Wealthy Caedicus had sent them
To Remulus of Tibur, to befriend him
From far off. This man left them to his grandson,
After whose time Rutulians plundered them.

351–­Messapus: See 8.6n.

361–­Tibur: Tivoli.

. 240 .

335

340

345

350

355

360

BOOK 9
And now they hung from powerful, doomed shoulders;
Messapus’ helmet with its showy plumes,
Fitted well too. They left the camp for safe ground.
Volcens, just then, came from the Latin city
With a response for Turnus, and three hundred
Cavalry with their shields—aside from them,
Their army was deployed across the plain.
Nearing the walls, they saw, off in the distance,
The young men take the path that headed left.
In the dim-­glimmering light the shining helmet,
Forgotten by Euryalus, betrayed him.
Alertly, Volcens called, “Halt, men! Who are you?
Where do you think you’re going, and for what?
Why are you armed?” They didn’t try to answer
But rushed for refuge to the night-­black woods.
The horsemen knew the byroads; splitting up,
They blocked all exits with a ring of guards.
The place was large, and full of dusky holm oaks
And rough brush; briars choked it everywhere.
Only some sparse trails showed, vague cattle tracks.
Euryalus, weighed down by plunder, stumbled
Through branching shadows. Fear befuddled him.
But Nisus didn’t notice; he escaped
And passed the place now called—from Alba—Alban.
(The lofty pens for King Latinus’ herds
Were there.) He stopped, looked back; his friend was gone.
“Where did I leave you, poor Euryalus?
Where should I look?” Back through the knotted path,
The maze of woods, he went, tracing his footprints
Where he could see, and wandered in still thickets.
Horses’ tread, clanging, signals—the pursuers!
387–­
the place now called—from
Alba—Alban: See 8.48n.
389–­He stopped, looked back; his

365

370

375

380

385

390

friend was gone: An echo of book 2,
when Aeneas realizes he has lost Creusa
during the sack of Troy (2.738–94).

. 241 .

BOOK 9
Before much longer, shouting reached his ears.
He saw the whole force rush Euryalus
And overwhelm him, though he struggled hard.
That dark deceitful spot had left him helpless.
But what should Nisus do? How should he strike
To free the boy? Perhaps he ought to plunge
Into their swords—a quick and noble death.
He’d hurl his spear. He swiftly drew it back
And gazed up at the moon above and prayed:
“Be with me now, Diana, help my struggle,
Keeper of forests, glory of the stars.
If for my sake my father brought your altar
His gifts, and if I hung your temple roof
With beasts killed in my hunts, to honor you,
Then guide my spear and let me rout this band.”
All of his body strained to throw the weapon
Of iron, which flew off, sliced through the shadows
Of night, went into Sulmo’s back and shattered,
Thrusting its splinters through his diaphragm.
He writhed, warm blood was spewing from his chest,
Long gasps convulsed his sides as chill death took him.
They looked to all sides. Nisus, now grown fiercer,
Poised a fresh weapon high up, by his ear.
As they stood shocked, the spear sang through the temples
Of Tagus and stuck fast in his warm brain.
Volcens, beside himself, still couldn’t see
The spear’s source and attack it in his fury.
He told Euryalus, “Then you can pay
For both with your hot blood.” He drew his sword
And strode up. Nisus shouted, wild with terror.
He couldn’t hide in darkness any longer,
He couldn’t stand such agony. “It’s me!
I’m here! I did it. Turn your swords on me!
It’s all my fault. He didn’t dare, he couldn’t.
The sky and the all-­knowing stars can witness:

. 242 .

395

400

405

410

415

420

425

BOOK 9
He only loved his luckless friend too much.”
He spoke, but couldn’t stop the spear that rammed
Into Euryalus’ ribs and split his white chest.
Dying, he thrashed. His lovely limbs and shoulders
Poured streams of blood; his neck sank limply down:
So, cut off by a plow, a purple flower
Faints away into death; so poppies bend
Their weary necks when rain weighs down their heads.
Nisus ran in among them, but he aimed
For Volcens only—that was all he wanted.
Enemies mobbed in close on either side
To drive him back. He fought on, lightning sword
Whirling. With this he pierced the shouting face
Of the Rutulian, paying with his own life.
He was stabbed through and through and hurled himself
On his dead friend, to find his rest and peace.
Lucky pair! If my song has any power,
You’ll be remembered while Aeneas’ children
Live near the Capitol’s unmoving rock,
And while a Roman father has dominion.
The plunder fell to the Rutulian cohort,
Who also, tearfully, took Volcens’ body.
As great a grief awaited them, with Rhamnes
Found lifeless, with the massacre of leaders—
Numa, Serranus. To the corpses crowds rushed,
To dying men, to ground the fresh gore warmed,
To rivulets that swelled with foaming blood.
A murmur rose: they saw Messapus’ badges
And helmet—so much work to win them back!
Dawn rose now from Tithonus’ saffron bed
And scattered her fresh light throughout the world.
Now in the sun-­soaked and revealing day,
First Turnus armed himself, then called his men
459–­Tithonus: Dawn’s husband.

. 243 .

430

435

440

445

450

455

460

BOOK 9
To arms. Each leader urged his bronze ranks on,
Inflaming them with news of what had happened.
And—piteous sight—they even raised the heads
Of Nisus and Euryalus on spear ends,
And marched with shouts behind.
Aeneas’ hard men faced them in a line
At the left wall (the river hugged the right one),
Guarded their moats, or grimly manned their towers.
A shock of grief—they recognized the heads
Too well. Black gore was oozing down the spears.
Rumor came swooping through the frightened town
And whispered to Euryalus’ mother. All warmth,
Down to her bones, went out of that poor lady.
She dropped her shuttle, and the thread unwound.
She dashed outdoors with piteous female keening,
Tore at her hair, ran for the walls and front lines,
Unmindful of the men there and the danger
Their spears held. Soon her wailing filled the sky:
“Euryalus, that’s you, my only solace
As my life closed? But how could you desert me
So cruelly, without letting your poor mother
Tell you good-­bye before that risky mission?
Alien Latium’s dogs and birds will tear you.
Your mother couldn’t walk you to the grave,
Close your eyes, wrap you in the robe I rushed,
Night and day, at my loom to finish—worry
In an old woman can be soothed this way.
Where will I look for you? What region holds
Your torn corpse? All of you that you bring back
Is this? I came with you on land and sea!
Rutulians, if you care, launch all your spears
At me, hack me to death, then fight your war.
Or you, great father of the gods, have pity,
Strike me with lightning, hurl the life I hate
To Hades: only that can end my pain.”

. 244 .

465

470

475

480

485

490

495

BOOK 9
A moan ran through the ranks. They all were heart-­struck,
Their strength numb, fighting spirit broken, grief
Enflamed—so Actor and Idaeus took her
In hand and led her back indoors, at orders
From sobbing Iulus and Ilioneus.
The bronze horn blared its fearful melody
Far off. Men shouted, and the sky roared back.
Volscians, under overlapping shields,
Rushed in to fill the moats and drag the fence down.
One group was set to climb the walls with ladders
And aimed to get in where the ring of guards
Was gapped or thin. The Trojans poured down weapons
Of all kinds and shoved back with sturdy pikes.
Their past long war had taught them siege defense.
They spun down massive boulders from the walls
To break the sheltered column, but the men
Beneath their sturdy roof enjoyed each blow—
Until the Trojans rolled a monstrous rock
To where the largest cohort threatened them;
This wrecked a stretch of the Rutulians’ cover
And struck its bearers down; the rest, though hearty,
Had no more taste for fighting blind, but struggled
To pelt the Trojans off their wall.
Elsewhere Mezentius brandished—chilling sight—
A fiery, smoking pine tree as a weapon.
Now the horse-­breaker, Neptune’s son Messapus,
Breached the fence, called for ladders for the walls.
So come, Calliope and all your sisters,
Inspire me, let me sing of Turnus’ slaughter,
The men that every soldier sent to Orcus.
505–­Volscians: A native Italian
people.
505–­under overlapping shields: The
“tortoise” formation, which featured
interlocked shields above and in front.

500

505

510

515

520

525

525–­
Calliope and all your sisters:
Calliope is the Muse of epic poetry; her
sisters are the eight other Muses.
527–­Orcus: The Underworld.

. 245 .

BOOK 9
Goddesses, help unfold that great war’s contours:
You know it; you know how to make it known.
There was a looming tower with high gangplanks
In a strategic spot. With all their strength,
All their resources, the Italians tried
To storm or topple it. Massed at the windows,
Trojans hurled stones and spears in their defense.
Now Turnus took the lead and threw a torch:
Its flames clung to the wall, spread in the wind,
Seized planks, stuck to the doors, devouring them.
Inside was futile panic to escape.
When the defenders backed away to huddle
In a safe place, their weight collapsed the tower,
And the sky echoed with the sudden crash.
Dying, they fell, impaled on their own spears
And the hard splinters—then the huge mass followed.
Only two crawled out, Lycus and Helenor.
This last, a youth sired by a Lydian king
On the slave Licymnia, was born in secret
And sent by her to Troy, though banned from war.
His arms were light: an unheroic shield
With no device, a bare sword. Latin columns
Flanked him now. He saw Turnus’ men in thousands,
And as a wild thing ringed in tight by hunters
Lashes against their spears and leaps on purpose
To perish on their weapons, so the young man
Rushed in to die among his enemies,
Making for where he saw the spears were densest.
Lycus, a better runner, dodged opponents
And missiles till he reached the wall. He struggled
To grip the top edge and the hands of friends.
529–­The line is thought to be spurious.

. 246 .

530

535

540

545

550

555

BOOK 9
Turnus ran after him and launched a spear
With a triumphant taunt: “Fool, did you think
You’d get away from me?” He tore him down
From where he hung—a stretch of wall came with him;
So a bird, keeper of Jove’s lightning, soars
Skyward, hooked claws around a hare or swan;
So a wolf drags a plundered lamb its mother
Searches for, bleating. Shouting rose on all sides.
Soldiers ran in to fill the moat with dirt
And hurl their torches to the roof. Lucetius
Had brought his to the gate; Ilioneus
Laid him out with a cliff shard. The skilled lancer
Liger struck down Emathion; Asilas,
Whose arrow stole from far off, Corynaeus.
Turnus killed Dioxippus, Clonius, Itys,
Promolus, Caeneus (who’d killed Ortygius),
Sagaris, and, on towered bastions, Idas.
Capys dispatched Privernus, who had dropped
His shield, the idiot, to clutch a slight wound
Dealt by Themillas’ spear. An arrow flew
To lodge deep in his left side, splitting open
His hidden breathways with a fatal wound.
The son of Arcens was a splendid sight
With his superb arms and embroidered cloak
Bright with red Spanish dye. His father’d sent him
From Mars’ grove by the banks of the Symaethus,
Close to Palicus’ altar, rich with gifts.
Mezentius put his spears aside and whipped
His hissing sling three times around his head.
The searing lead chunk hit the brow straight on,
Split it, and stretched the tall form on the ground.
563–­a bird, keeper of Jove’s light­
ning: The eagle, Jove’s bird.

560

565

570

575

580

585

584–85–­Symaethus . . . Palicus: Palicus was a god worshipped in Sicily near
the river Symaethus.

. 247 .

BOOK 9
They say Ascanius first aimed an arrow
In war that day—before, he’d only hunted—
And with his own skill brought Numanus down.
Remulus was his clan name. He was freshly
Allied: he’d married Turnus’ younger sister.
Pride-­swollen as a sharer in the kingdom,
He came up past the vanguard now to flaunt
His bulk and shout the hit and miss of insults:
“Twice-­beaten Phrygians, don’t you feel embarrassed
At how we keep you penned behind your fence?
You fight with us, to take away our wives?
What god, what madness drove you to this country?
No sons of Atreus here, no glib Ulysses.
Our stock is tough; we make our infants tougher,
Dipping them in a savagely cold river.
Our boys stay up and wear the woods out, hunting.
Their games are archery and taming horses.
Our young men, used to scarcity and hard work,
Subdue the soil and batter towns with war.
We live our lives with weapons, drive our oxen
With butts of spears. Not even slow old age
Cripples our courage or our heartiness.
Helmets press down white hair, since we prefer
To live on what we plunder, as a habit.
Needlework glows on you, saffron and purple.
You love to laze and treat yourself to dancing.
Your hats have ribbons and your tunics sleeves.
You’re Phrygian women! Climb up Dindymus:
The double flute there plays the songs you’re used to.

592–93–­Numanus . . . Remulus: His
name recalls Romulus, Remus, and the
early Roman king Numa Pompilius.
617–­Phrygian women: Recalls Ther‑

590

595

600

605

610

615

sites taunting the Greeks as “Achaean
women” in Iliad 2.
617–­Dindymus: A mountain in
Phrygia.

. 248 .

BOOK 9
The Mother on Mount Ida calls with drums
And boxwood flutes. Leave weapons for us men.”
Ascanius could not endure these boasts
And ugly taunts. He turned and pulled the bow wide,
Aiming an arrow on the horse-­gut bowstring,
And paused, a suppliant addressing Jove:
“Almighty Jupiter, bless my bold effort.
I’ll bring your temple ritual gifts myself
And set before your altar a white bullock
With gilded horns, the same height as his mother.
He’ll butt and kick up sand already.” Hearing,
The sire of heaven thundered from a clear sky
On the left, as the deadly bow was twanging.
With a grim hiss, the drawn-­back arrow fled.
Its iron point transfixed the curving temples
Of Remulus. “Go bait brave soldiers now!
This is your answer from twice-­beaten Phrygians.”
Jubilant Trojans followed up these words
With roaring yells. Their hearts soared to the skies.
Long-­haired Apollo, cloud-­throned in the sky,
Watched the Italian army and the town,
And now he spoke to Iulus in his triumph:
“Bless your first brave act: that’s the way to heaven.
Godborn, you’ll father gods. Troy cannot hold you.
All destined wars will one day cease, in justice,
Under Assaracus’ posterity.”
He soared through gusty air down from the aether
To the boy, and assumed old Butes’ features.
This was the faithful house guard and retainer
Who’d served Dardanian Anchises first,
Whose son made him Ascanius’ protector.
619–­The Mother on Mount Ida: Cybele.

. 249 .

620

625

630

635

640

645

BOOK 9
Like this old man in voice and coloring
And armor with its dreadful clang, Apollo
Strode up and spoke to Iulus in his fervor:
“Enough, Aeneas’s son! Your arrow killed
Numanus; you survived this first success,
Which great Apollo gave, with his own weapon.
But you must stop now.” Halfway through these words,
Apollo put aside the mortal form,
And faded into far-­off, filmy air.
The Trojan leaders heard his quiver clatter—
He vanished, and they recognized the armed god,
And held war-­hot Ascanius in check
At Phoebus’ holy orders. They themselves
Returned to their exposed and risky fight.
A shout went all along the walls and ramparts.
They fiercely aimed their bows and whirled their spear-­thongs
And strewed the ground with weapons. Hollow helmets
And shields were clanging in the bitter fight,
Thick as ground-­lashing rain out of the west
At the Kids’ stormy rise; or hail that storm clouds
Plunge in the sea—the soaking gale that Jove hurls,
Bristling with southern blasts, to split the gray vault.
Alcanor’s sons by Ida’s nymph Iaera,
Fighters called Pandarus and Bitias,
Raised in Jove’s woods, huge as their native firs
And mountains, opened up the gates assigned them
And called opponents in. Trusting their weapons,
They flanked the entranceway, as strong as towers,
Iron-­clad, and with lofty, ruffing plumes;
As when two oak trees rear their bushy heads
To heaven with exalted, nodding crests
Beside the flowing water, on the banks
669–­the Kids’ stormy rise: The Goat
Stars, now called Auriga, the Charioteer.

. 250 .

650

655

660

665

670

675

680

BOOK 9
Of the Po, or the lovely Athesis.
Rutulians saw the opening and swarmed it.
But soon Aquiculus—fine sight in armor—
Reckless Tmarus, Quercens, Haemon (Mars’ son)
Had either turned and run with all their troops
Or laid their lives down on that very threshold.
The clashing hatred and the fury grew.
The Trojans, massed at one point, dared to fight
Hand to hand, and to sally out ahead.
Elsewhere the chieftain Turnus, on a rampage
Through fighters, got the news of this fresh slaughter:
The enemy was flaunting open gates!
A boundless fury made him storm away
To the Dardanian gate and the proud brothers.
Antiphates led the attack, a bastard
Of Prince Sarpedon by a Theban mother.
Turnus hurled an Italian cornel spear
That sliced the soft air, pierced the gut, and burrowed
Up the chest. Froth pulsed out of that black hollow.
The iron point grew warm, lodged in the lung.
He struck down Merops, Erymas, Aphidnus,
And flame-­eyed Bitias (who’d roared with pride)—
Not with a spear (he wouldn’t have surrendered
His life to one) but with a shrieking pike
Propelled like lightning through his shield’s two ox hides
And double gold scales of his trusted breastplate.
His massive body crumpled and collapsed.
The earth groaned, and his great shield clanged above him,
Just as, on the Euboean coast at Baiae,
A pier built in the sea on massive rock piles
Collapses, with a steep, fast drag of wreckage,
Bursts on the shallow seafloor before settling;
710–­the Euboean coast at Baiae: On
the Bay of Naples, near Cumae.

. 251 .

685

690

695

700

705

710

BOOK 9
The water is in chaos; black sand rises.
Islands boom: high Prochyta, Inarime—
Typhoeus’ prison bed, placed by Jove’s orders.
Now Mars, war master, gave the Latins strength
And spirit, twisting sharp goads in their hearts,
While letting loose black Fear and Rout on Trojans.
The Latin troops swarmed in—the fight was here;
The warrior god inspired them.
Pandarus saw his brother’s sprawled-­out body,
And knew the course that destiny was taking.
With all his strength, heaving with his broad shoulders,
He turned the gate in on its hinge and left
Many friends shut out in the brutal battle.
Others rushed through in time. The idiot
Missed the Rutulian prince, who got inside
Deep in the crowd—invited to the city:
A giant tiger penned with helpless cattle.
From Turnus’ eyes a fresh light flashed, his weapons
Rang fearsomely, his blood-­red crest convulsed,
His shield flared lightning—and Aeneas’ people
Instantly knew the giant hated form
And panicked. But then towering Pandarus
Ran forward, burning to avenge his brother.
“Amata’s wedding gift this isn’t—it’s no palace;
And it’s not Ardea, your native stronghold.
This is a hostile fort. You can’t get out.”
Serenely Turnus smiled at him and answered:
“Come, if you dare, fight hand to hand, then go

715–16–­Prochyta, Inarime—Typhoeus’
prison bed: Islands near Baiae. Typhoeus
was a Giant imprisoned under the earth
by Jupiter.

715

720

725

730

735

740

719–­Fear and Rout: Deities personifying the phenomena.
738–­Ardea: Turnus’ city.

. 252 .

BOOK 9
Tell Priam that you’ve met Achilles here.”
Pandarus put his whole strength into hurling
His crude spear with its knots and green bark. Breezes
Wafted it off, or Saturn’s daughter Juno
Turned it aside. It hit the gate and stuck.
Turnus spoke: “Here’s a weapon and a strong hand
You won’t escape: it’s me who drives this home.”
He reared up with his sword and thrust it midway
Between the young man’s temples, monstrously
Splitting his forehead and his beardless cheeks.
A crash—the ground was shaken by his huge weight:
He crumpled and sprawled dying there, his armor
Covered with gory brains, and one precise half
Of the head hanging down at either shoulder.
The routed Trojans scattered in their terror.
Had their pursuer been inspired to break
The bolts and let his comrades in, that war
And that race would have found their end that day.
Hot frenzy, though, crazed bloodlust drove him forward
Onto the battle line.
First, he caught Phaleris and Gyges (hamstrung)—
Seized both their spears and thrust them in the backs
Of men he chased, with strength and nerve from Juno:
Halys and shield-­pierced Phegeus joined the dead;
Halius, Prytanis, Noëmon, Alcander—
Incautious on the walls, rallying others.
Lynceus called his friends and made for Turnus,
Who lunged left from the earthworks, flashed a sword
And stopped him. In his helmet lay his head,
Far off: one blow, close up, had severed it.
742–­
Tell Priam that you’ve met
Achilles here: A fulfillment of the Sibyl’s
prophecy, 6.89–90.

. 253 .

745

750

755

760

765

770

BOOK 9
Amycus fell next, wild-­beast killer—no one
Was handier at smearing spears with poison;
And Clytius, Aeolus’ son; Cretheus
As well, the Muses’ follower, whose joy
Was setting music to the lyre and singing
Of horses, weapons, warriors, and battles.
News of this carnage brought the Trojan leaders—
Mnestheus, fierce Serestus—there at last.
They saw the enemy inside, friends scattered.
“Where are you running?” yelled Mnestheus.
“What walls, what fortress have you got but these?
Citizens! Will you let a single man
Trapped in your earthworks pile your town with slaughter
And send your finest soldiers down to Hades?
Have pity on your ancient gods, your poor race,
And great Aeneas! Cowards, where’s your shame?”
This roused them. Now they rallied against Turnus
In a dense column. Gradually, he moved
Back to a spot encircled by a stream.
The Trojans pressed more fiercely on, converging
With loud shouts, as a band of hunters holds
A savage lion at their spear points; frightened,
Glaring, and storming, he retreats, but fury
And courage will not let him run. He longs
To strike back at the men and spears but can’t.
So Turnus slowly and reluctantly
Stepped backward, as his spirit seethed with rage.
He even dashed clear through opposing ranks
Twice, and twice scattered them along the walls.
The camp soon reunited all its forces.
And Juno, Saturn’s daughter, didn’t dare
Grant strength to fight them: Jove sent down limpid Iris
Conveying threats and orders for his sister
804–­his sister: Juno.

. 254 .

775

780

785

790

795

800

BOOK 9
If Turnus didn’t leave the Trojans’ walls.
His shield and sword were not enough—the young man
Could not hold out. The missiles from all sides
Engulfed him. Constantly his helmet rang
Around his head. Stones split the solid bronze,
Tore off the plume. His shield could not endure
The blows. The Trojans—thundering Mnestheus
Among them—heaped their spears on. Turnus’ body
Was pouring filthy sweat—he had no time now
To catch his breath. He shook, worn, sore, and panting.
At last he jumped headfirst, with all his weapons,
Into the river, and its tawny surge
Welcomed him, raised him on soft waves, returned him,
Content and cleansed of blood, to his companions.

. 255 .

805

810

815

BOOK 10

All-­powerful Olympus’ hall now opened.
The sire of gods and king of men had called
A conclave to his starry home, steep lookout
Onto the world, the Trojan camp, the Latins.
In a hall open on both sides, the gods sat.
“Sky dwellers,” he began, “what made your purpose
Turn backward into vicious rivalry?
I forbade Italy to clash with Troy.
Why this rebellious strife? What terror drives
Each side to swarm for arms and rouse the other?
The time will come for battle. Don’t invoke it.
Wild Carthage will one day send devastation
Through shattered Alps against the Roman walls.
Then you can have your hateful fight, your pillage.
Leave off, content: confirm the pact I sanctioned.”
Brief words—but golden Venus gave an answer
That wasn’t brief.
“Father, mankind’s—all things’—eternal ruler
(What greater being is there to appeal to?),
You see how the Rutulians gloat and Turnus
Drives through the ranks, a striking presence, scornful
In his success. Without the aid of closed walls,
The Teucrians must fight within their gates,

2–­The sire of gods and king of men:
Jupiter.
3–­A conclave: Councils of the gods
are a standard feature in Greco-­Roman
epic.

5

10

15

20

12–­Carthage will one day send dev­
astation: A reference to the Second Punic
War; see 4.386n.

. 256 .

BOOK 10
Within their earthworks, filling moats with blood;
Aeneas is far off and unaware.
When will you let these sieges end? A new force
Looms at Troy’s walls and stifles her rebirth.
Tydeus’ son—now from Aetolian Arpi—
Assails them. Once again I will be wounded:
Weapons of mortals wait for me, your child.
If Trojans came without your holy sanction
To Italy, don’t help, but punish them.
But if so many oracles, from gods
And the dead, brought them, how can anyone
Turn your commands aside, ordain new fate?
Why mention ships burned by the shore at Eryx,
Or crazed gales the Aeolian king of storms
Stirred up, or Iris shunted through the clouds?
Now she incites creation’s only part
Still left in peace, the demons, thrusts Allecto
Up to the light, to rave through Italy’s towns.
Now I don’t mind about the empire hoped for
In luckier times. Let those you favor win.
No lands for Teucrians? Your wife’s too bitter?
I beg, then, by Troy’s smoking ruins, father:
Let me discharge Ascanius from war,
Unharmed. Please let my grandson live. Aeneas
Can toss on foreign seas, for all I care:
Whatever road fate grants him, let him follow,
28–29–­Tydeus’ son . . . Once again
I will be wounded: Tydeus’ son is Diomedes, who wounded Venus when
she intervened to save Aeneas at Troy
(Iliad 5); he now resides in Italy (8.9–
17).
36–38–­
ships burned . . . crazed
gales . . . Iris: Juno has orchestrated the
storm that stranded the Trojans at Carthage (1.50–119), and she has used Iris

25

30

35

40

45

to initiate the burning of the Trojan fleet
(5.605–63) and to rouse Turnus (9.1–
22).
39–­creation’s only part: The cosmos
was traditionally divided into heaven,
earth and sea, and the Underworld.
Venus claims Juno has already brought
war to the first two and is now disturbing the third.
40–­Allecto: One of the three Furies.

. 257 .

BOOK 10
But let me take his son from ruthless battle.
I own Amathus, Cythera, high Paphus,
The Cyprus shrine. Let him grow old with me,
Unarmed, inglorious. Command that Carthage
Trample and tyrannize Ausonia.
Nothing from us will stop it. Has it helped him
To live through that cursed war, escape the Greek fires,
Take endless risks at sea and on bleak land,
In search of Latium and a reborn Troy?
They should have settled on their homeland’s ashes,
On Troy’s site. Give the wretched Trojans back
Xanthus, Simoïs, the entire round
Of Ilium’s rise and fall.” Then queenly Juno
Spoke in her rage: “Why shatter my deep silence
And bring my hidden grief to public words?
Has any god or human forced Aeneas
Into Latinus’ kingdom? Granted, fate—
Or else Cassandra’s ravings—led him there:
I certainly was not the one to urge him
Out of his camp and into risky winds,
Leaving the walls and army to a boy,
To roil the Tuscans and those peaceful tribes.
What god, what tyranny of mine propelled him?
Juno did this? Or Iris, sent from clouds?
‘How wrong to ring this infant Troy with flames!’
Divine Venilia’s son, Pilumnus’ grandson
Turnus can’t get a foothold in his own land!
And Trojans putting Latium to the torch?
And farms usurped and looted? In-­laws chosen

51–­Amathus, Cythera, high Paphus:
Locations of sanctuaries of Venus.
67– ­Cassandra’s ravings: Cassandra
told Anchises that the Trojans would
settle in Italy: see 3.183–87.

50

55

60

65

70

75

70–­a boy: Ascanius, left in charge by
Aeneas despite his young years.

. 258 .

BOOK 10
At will, girls torn from promised husbands’ arms?
Hands clasped in peace—and weapons studding prows?
You stole Aeneas from the hands of Greeks
And left them only mist and empty breezes.
Out of the ships you made a fleet of nymphs.
Helping Rutulians is a crime for me?
Aeneas gone and unaware—so be it.
Paphus, Idalium, Cythera are yours;
Why meddle with this tough, war-­pregnant city?
Did I attempt to topple shaky Troy?
I—or the man who threw the wretched people
In the Greeks’ way? What made two continents
Rise up in arms? Why were their oaths betrayed?
Did I send out the Trojan lover-­boy
Who raided Sparta? Did I furnish weapons?
Feed war with lust? The time to fear was then!
It’s late for petty wrangles and complaints.”
This was the plea of Juno. All the gods
Murmured their different thoughts, as forests murmur,
Catching the first gusts, whisking hidden rustlings,
Speaking to sailors of the storm to come.
Then the almighty father, the world’s ruler,
Began. For him the gods’ high hall grew silent;
The deep earth shook, the towering sky was still,
The West Winds settled, oceans calmed their waves.
“Hear what I say and fix it in your hearts.
A league of the Ausonians and Trojans
Was not allowed, nor can your quarrel end.
To no one’s luck today, to no one’s hope

81–­You stole Aeneas from the hands
of Greeks: See 10.28–29n.
83–­a fleet of nymphs: It was Cybele,
not Venus, who transformed the ships
(9.77–122).

80

85

90

95

100

105

89–­the man who threw: Paris. Juno
attributes the Trojan War—and thus
Aeneas’s troubles—to Venus’s support in
his abduction of Helen.

. 259 .

BOOK 10
Will I show favor—Trojan or Rutulian.
If it’s Italian fate, or Trojan folly,
Or false advice behind this siege, no matter.
Everyone—the Rutulians too—will earn
Triumph or pain: King Jupiter is neutral.
The fates will find their way.” He nodded, swearing
By Styx, his brother’s river—pitch-­seared banks
And dark gulf. At his nod Olympus shook.
No more was said. He rose from his gold throne.
Gods drew around and led him to the door.
Meanwhile the slaughtering Rutulians thronged
At every gate and ringed the walls with flames.
The Trojan band could not escape their fort.
They stood pathetic, helpless, and quite hopeless
On towers or thinly topped the ring of ramparts.
In the front line were Hicetaon’s son
Thymoetes; and Imbrasus’ Asius;
Old Thymbris; Castor; next, Sarpedon’s brothers
Clarus and Thaemon, from proud Lycia.
Huge as his father, Clytius, or his brother
Menestheus, Lyrnessan Acmon strained
Hugely to haul no small part of a mountain.
They fought with spears or rocks in their defense.
Fire was thrown and arrows set to bowstrings.
And in the midst was Venus’ rightful darling,
The Trojan boy, who’d left his lovely head bare.
He gleamed like gems in tawny gold, which make
A head or neck resplendent, or like ivory
Set by skill in Orician terebinth
Or boxwood. On his milky neck cascaded
113–14–­
He nodded, swearing by
Styx: Oaths sworn by the river Styx were
considered inviolable.

. 260 .

133–­The Trojan boy: Ascanius.

110

115

120

125

130

135

BOOK 10
Long hair beneath a pliant band of gold.
The brave tribes saw you there too, Ismarus,
Guiding your poisoned shafts to bloodshed. Strong men
Work in your noble Lydian clan’s fields
That the Pactolus, gold-­dust river, waters.
Mnestheus was there too, still exulting
From driving Turnus from the earthwork walls;
And Capys—the Campanian town is named
For him. So these men met in hard war’s clashes.
That night Aeneas cut the channel’s waters.
Leaving Evander, he approached the king
In the Etruscan camp, told who he was,
His strengths, his needs, the savage heart of Turnus,
The allies that Mezentius was gaining.
He warned how risky human projects are,
But mingled pleas with all this; straight off, Tarchon
Joined with him in a pact. The Lydian race
Embarked beneath a foreign captain, paying
Fate’s debt, and by the gods’ command. Aeneas
Led with his ship. Its beak showed Phrygian lions
Below Mount Ida—dear to Trojan exiles.
The mighty hero sat there and considered
How the war might end. Pallas, at his left,
Asked about stars, the guides of that dim voyage,
And all the leader’s trials on land and sea.
Goddesses, open Helicon, recite
What forces fitted vessels out and followed
Aeneas from Etruscan shores by sea.
142–­Pactolus: The gold-­
producing
river where King Midas washed away his
“golden touch.”
148–­the king: Tarchon, commander
of the Etruscans.
154–­The Lydian race: The Etruscans
were believed to come from Lydia.

140

145

150

155

160

165

163–214–­Vergil’s catalogue of ships
supplied by Etruscan allies is inspired by
Iliad 2.
163–­Goddesses, open Helicon: The
Muses of Mount Helicon; see 7.641n.

. 261 .

BOOK 10
The armored Tigress of King Massicus
Sliced the waves. In his charge a thousand young men
Left Cosae and walled Clusium, deadly bows
And arrows in light quivers on their shoulders.
Fierce Abas’s whole force wore resplendent arms.
A gold Apollo glittered on his prow.
His native Populonia had yielded
Six hundred battle-­hardened youths; from Ilva
(With endless iron mines) three hundred more marched.
Next came Asilas, who brought prophecy
From gods to men. The stars, the guts of beasts,
The tongues of birds, the prescient lightning served him.
He swept with him a thousand bristling spears.
Pisa, Alphaean town on Tuscan land,
Had placed them at his service. Lovely Astyr
Followed, trusting his horse and rainbow armor.
The Caeretans and farmers by the Minio,
Old Pyrgi and Graviscae, which breeds sickness,
Sent three more hundred, equally devoted.
Heroic leader of Ligurians,
I won’t omit you, Cunarus, or you,
Cupavo, with few men; your swan-­plumed crest
Spoke of your father’s transformation—Love’s fault.
Cycnus, they say, mourned his dear Phaethon
In leafy shade of poplars, the boy’s sisters.
He sang because it soothed his bitter longing,
And grew soft feathers, white like old men’s hair,
168– ­Cosae:–­A city on the coast,
more usually called Cosa.
168–­Clusium:–­A city near Lake Tra­
simene.
179–­Pisa, Alphaean town: Modern
Pisa, founded by settlers from Pisa in
Greece, near the river Alpheus.

170

175

180

185

190

185–­Ligurians: Liguria is a coastal
region of northwestern Italy, coinciding
with the Italian Riviera.
189– ­Cycnus: Cycnus’s lover Phaethon, child of the sun god Helios, was
killed driving his father’s solar chariot.
The mourning Cycnus was transformed
into a swan.

. 262 .

BOOK 10
And left the ground, calling and chasing stars.
His son now led the fleet, with troops his own age.
Its oars heaved his enormous Centaur forward;
The figurehead, hefting a boulder, menaced
The waves; the long keel furrowed the deep water.
The father’s banks gave troops to Ocnus, Manto
The seer’s and the Tuscan river’s son.
He founded Mantua, named for his mother—
Mantua rich in different lineages:
Three races and four clans in each, but this
Is the chief town, with strength from Tuscan stock.
Mezentius drew five hundred more to fight:
Mincius River, veiled in blue reeds, brought them
Seaward from Lake Benacus in a warship.
Stalwart Aulestes’ hundred oarsmen surged
To beat the water, turning calm to froth
Round the huge Triton figurehead that blasted
On a blue conch and terrified the straits;
His shaggy torso human to the waist,
Below, a whale. Waves roared and foamed beneath him.
These chosen princes sailed in thirty ships
To Troy’s aid. Bronze prows cut the briny plain.
Day had retreated from the sky. Kind Phoebe
Drove her night horses tramping through high heaven.
Aeneas (wakeful in anxiety)
Trimmed the sails or sat, steering, at the tiller.
Suddenly in midcourse a band of comrades
Appeared; the ships that kindly Cybele
200–­Mantua: Vergil’s hometown,
named for Manto, daughter of the famous seer Tiresias.
204–­Mezentius drew: Because of
their hatred for him.

195

200

205

210

215

220

206–­Lake Benacus: Now Lake
Garda, in northern Italy.
215–­Phoebe: Another name (meaning “shining”) for the moon goddess.
220–­the ships that kindly Cybele:
See 10.83n.

. 263 .

BOOK 10
Had changed to nymphs, goddesses of the sea—
One for each bronze beak that had stood on shore.
They swam along with him and sliced the waves.
Far off, they’d known their king; they danced around him.
Cymodocea, the most eloquent,
Came up behind, her right hand on the stern,
Her left hand softly paddling, breasts emerging.
He didn’t know her. “Child of gods, Aeneas,
Are you awake? Then let the sails’ rope go.
We are your fleet, pines from the holy heights
Of Ida—sea nymphs now. With sword and flame
The treacherous Rutulian hounded us.
We had to break your chains and seek you here.
The Mother pitied us, transformed us, sent us
To live a blessed life beneath the water.
The walls and moat imprison your young son
Among fierce Latins and their bristling spears.
Arcadian horsemen hold their posts, brave Tuscans
Along with them. But Turnus with his squadrons
Blocks them, resolved to keep your camps apart.
Rise up! Call your confederates to arms
At first dawn. Take the shield the god of fire
Has ringed with gold and made invincible.
Tomorrow’s light—if you will trust my words—
Will see great heaps of the Rutulian dead.”
She spoke and dove away, but first pushed deftly
At the high hull, which ran on through the waves
More swiftly than a spear or wind-­quick arrow,
And the rest sped behind. Anchises’ son,
The Trojan, stunned, then joyful, turned his gaze
To the sky’s arch and prayed, “Idaean Mother
Of gods, devoted to Mount Dindymus,
252–­Mount Dindymus: A Phrygian
mountain sacred to Cybele.

. 264 .

225

230

235

240

245

250

BOOK 10
Tower-­crowned towns, and chariot-­yoked lions:
Lead me in war, achieve your prophecy,
March with the Phrygians, bringing them good fortune.”
The day, in its swift circle, had returned;
The ripe sun routed nighttime as he spoke.
He called his troops to arms: they must await
His signal, with their hearts prepared for war.
Now he could see the Trojans and their camp
From the high stern. He raised the flaring shield
On his left arm. His people on the walls
Shouted up to the sky—hope spurred their rage—
And threw their spears with force, like cranes from Strymon
Who skim the upper air beneath black clouds,
Fleeing the South Winds with loud, cheerful calls.
The king and lords of Italy were stunned
To see the vessels turning toward the shore.
The sea became a fleet that flooded in.
A flame poured from Aeneas’ feathered crest;
The gold boss on his shield was spewing fire,
As when a clear night brings the deathly glow
Of bleeding comets, or the Dog Star rises,
Burning with drought and sickness for weak mortals,
And spreads malignant light across the sky.
But Turnus didn’t lose his nerve—he’d do it:
Get to the shore in time, beat back the landing—
First heartening his troops, or baiting them:
“Now you can smash them, as you’ve yearned to do.
253–­Tower-­crowned . . . lions: Cybele is depicted wearing a turret crown
and driving a chariot pulled by lions.
264–­Strymon: Cranes were believed
to winter at the river Strymon in Thrace.
270–­A flame poured from Aeneas’
feathered crest: Echoes a famous image
of Achilles from Iliad 18.

255

260

265

270

275

273–­Dog Star: Sirius, whose rising
was associated in antiquity with drought,
famine, and madness.
278–­The line is thought to be spurious.

. 265 .

BOOK 10
Courage controls the god of war. Remember
Your wives and homes. Remake your fathers’ fame
And heroism. Hurry to the surf
And catch the sailors staggering and fearful.
Fortune helps bold men.”
Still speaking, he considered which to lead
On this attack, and which should keep the siege.
Aeneas sent his comrades down the gangplanks
From the high sterns. Most watched the ebbing sea
And made a cautious leap into the shallows.
Some climbed down oars. Now Tarchon spied a place
Where no waves broke and boomed to mark the shallows,
But untouched sea washed, with a gentle swell.
He turned his prow there and implored his troops:
“My chosen company, drive on your oars,
Hurl your ships forward—each hull’s beak will split
The hostile land apart, each plow a furrow.
I wouldn’t shrink from breaking on that berth
The moment I seize land.” His comrades heard
And surged against the oars and brought the boats
Through frothing water onto Latin soil.
Now every hull had settled without harm,
Gripping the dry sand—all except for Tarchon’s.
On a projecting sandbank in the shallows
It hung and teetered and withstood the waves—
Then shattered, pouring men into the surf
To fight the benches and the splintered oars
And the hard undertow that caught their feet.
Instantly, zealous Turnus took his whole force
To stand and face the Trojans on the shore.
The signal blared. Aeneas charged first, cutting

284–­Fortune helps bold men: A Latin
proverb incorporated here by Vergil.

. 266 .

280

285

290

295

300

305

310

BOOK 10
The rustic ranks of Latins down—an omen
Of how the fight would end. He killed huge Theron,
Who first came at him. Bronze joints, gold scales yielded,
And the sword pierced his side and drank his blood.
He wounded Lichas, sacred to Apollo:
Cut from his lifeless mother yet surviving
The knife himself. Aeneas hurled to death
Huge Gyas and tough Cisseus, who mowed
The lines. No use their clubs from Hercules,
No use their strong hands or their sire, Melampus,
Hercules’ friend in all his stringent tasks
On earth. The hero hurled a javelin
Through Pharus’ shouting, boasting, coward mouth.
And you, poor Cydon, there for Clytius,
Your latest love, with blond down on his cheeks,
Would have been brought down by a Trojan hand
That turned all passion for young men to nothing,
Had Phorcus’ seven sons, your troop of brothers,
Not hedged you closely, throwing seven spears,
Some to bounce from Aeneas’ shield and helmet,
Others to graze him, when kind Venus turned them.
But now Aeneas spoke to staunch Achates:
“Give me the weapons planted in Greek bodies
At Troy. Not one I hurl at the Rutulians
Will go to waste.” He snatched a giant spear
And threw it. Macon’s bronze shield was transfixed—
His breastplate and the breast behind it shattered:
Alcanor caught his brother, as he fell,
With his right arm—through which the hero’s lance
Continued unimpeded, soaked in blood.

315–16–­sacred to Apollo: cut from
his lifeless mother: Babies born by Caesarian section were dedicated to Apollo,
god of medicine.

. 267 .

315

320

325

330

335

340

BOOK 10
His own dead hand now hung by scanty sinews.
Numitor snatched the spear that killed his brother
And aimed it at Aeneas, but to lodge it
Was not his fate. He grazed Achates’ thigh.
Clausus from Cures, young and strong and bold,
Launched a stiff spear at Dryops, who was speaking.
It drove beneath his chin and pierced his throat:
His words and life both ended in one moment.
His forehead hit the earth, in thick spewed gore.
Three youths from Boreas’ high clan in Thrace
And the three sons Ismaran Idas sent
Fell under different wounds. Halaesus led
Auruncans in a charge. The son of Neptune,
Messapus, followed with fine horses: all blocked
The landing, struggling on the very threshold
Of Italy. As winds across the vast sky
With equal strength and courage meet in battle,
A stalemate of themselves, the clouds, the sea,
The world a standoff and the end unknown—
So were the Trojans and the Latins, clashing,
Foot locked with foot, hands grappling man to man.
Elsewhere a rushing stream had rolled down boulders
And scattered them with trees ripped from its banks.
Here on this torn-­up ground Arcadians
Had left their horses, but they weren’t accustomed
To charging as a line of infantry.
When Pallas saw the Latins routing them,
He pleaded and harangued in desperation:
“Where are you running, friends? By your brave acts
And selves, by King Evander and his triumphs,

345–­Clausus from Cures: An ancestor of the powerful Claudian family, one
branch of the Julio-­
Claudian dynasty
that produced several emperors.

345

350

355

360

365

370

350–­Boreas: The North Wind, believed to originate in the mountains of
Thrace.

. 268 .

BOOK 10
And by my hope of winning fame like his:
Your swords must cut a path through your opponents.
Your feet are useless! Our great country calls
Both you and me to meet the thickest onslaught.
These are not gods but men attacking men,
An equal count of mortal hands and souls.
Shall we go back—or to the Trojan camp?”
He pierced the center of the densest ranks.
Lagus was in his way first—evil luck
Set him there: tugging at a giant boulder,
When a spear hurtled, striking where ribs branch
Out from the spine. Now Pallas bent to yank
The shaft free, just as Hispo made a lunge
In reckless fury at his friend’s cruel death.
Pallas was quick to put a stop to him,
Driving a sword deep in his panting lung.
He turned to Sthenius, then Anchemolus
Of Rhoetus’ ancient race, who’d violated—
Rash crime—the bedroom of his father’s wife.
Twins also fell in those Rutulian fields—
You, Daucus’ sons, Thymber and Larides,
Whose likeness baffled and amused your parents.
Evander’s child gave them a brutal difference
By slicing Thymber’s head off with a sword,
Then Larides’ right hand—it twitched back toward him,
The dying fingers clutching at the sword.
Their angry shame at Pallas’ taunts and triumph
Heated and armed Arcadians for battle.
Rhoeteus drove past, making his escape:
The youth impaled him; Ilus was reprieved
(For a short time)—the spear was aimed at him,
378–­
He pierced the center of the
densest ranks: The beginning of Pallas’ aristeia, a conventional scene in epic

375

380

385

390

395

400

poetry in which a hero displays excellence in combat.

. 269 .

BOOK 10
But Rhoeteus took it, while you noble brothers,
Teuthras and Tyres, chased him. Out he rolled
And beat Rutulian ground with numbing heels.
When summer winds he’s prayed for start to rise,
A shepherd scatters fires around the woods;
The gaps catch suddenly: a battle line
Of fierce unbroken burning spans the country:
The victor sits and eyes victorious flames.
Likewise the courage of uniting troops
Seconded Pallas. But war-­keen Halaesus
Went forward under cover of his shield.
He slaughtered Ladon, Pheres, Demodocus.
Strymonius reached for his throat; a bright blade
Lopped his hand; then a rock smashed Thoas’ face:
Gory brains, skull chips flew. His seer father
Had hid the child Halaesus in the woods,
But when death lulled the white-­haired old man’s eyes,
The Fates could claim the child, a sacrifice
To weapons of Evander. Pallas now prayed,
“Make this throw lucky, Father Tiber, piercing
Halaesus’ strong breast, and your sacred oak
Will have his arms and armor.” The god heard him,
And the Arcadian spear found poor Halaesus’
Exposed chest, as it shielded Imaon.
Lausus, a great force here, did not desert
The slaughter-­panicked ranks. He first killed Abas,
The mainstay of the fight, who came at him.
Arcadia’s children fell, Etruscans fell,
And Trojans whom the Greeks had left alive;
Leaders and brawn were equal in the clash.
The rearguard pushed the front line to a mass
Of hampered weapons. Pallas drove his own men,
And Lausus his—the youths were beautiful
426–­Lausus: The son of Mezentius.

. 270 .

405

410

415

420

425

430

BOOK 10
And close in age. Homecoming was denied
To both by fate. But high Olympus’ king
Would not consent for them to face each other.
Their doom would come from greater enemies.
Meanwhile the kind nymph sent her brother Turnus
To Lausus’ aid. He sped his chariot
Through the line, telling comrades, “Now stand down.
Pallas belongs to me—I’ll go for him.
I only wish his father could look on.”
He spoke. His comrades quit the field as ordered.
With the Rutulians gone, the youth, transfixed
By the sneered order, let his hard gaze rove
Up and down Turnus’ huge form from a distance.
He gave this answer to the tyrant’s words:
“Either brings praise: the warlord’s arms or glory
In death—it makes no difference to my father.
So stop your threats.” He stepped into the open,
Freezing the blood in the Arcadians’ hearts.
Turnus jumped down, and now on foot he moved
Close in. A lion on his lofty post
Sees a bull lunging on a distant plain
And hurtles toward him: Turnus looked like this.
Pallas first gauged his spear’s range, then stepped forward,
On the huge sky he called, in hope that chance
Would bless his bravery against the odds.
“Hercules, come—my father took you in,
A stranger—help in this great enterprise.
Let dying Turnus see his bloody weapons
435–36–­
Homecoming was denied
to both by fate: Lausus will be killed by
Aeneas, Pallas by Turnus.
439–­kind nymph: Juturna, deified
after she was raped by Jupiter.
443–­his father: Evander, one of
Aeneas’ primary Italian allies.

435

440

445

450

455

460

460–­Hercules: The people of Pallanteum (sometimes called Arcadians by
Vergil) had a special relationship with
Hercules, having adopted his cult after
he saved them from the monster Cacus,
as narrated by Evander at 8.185–275.

. 271 .

BOOK 10
Taken from him by these hands, once they’ve won.”
The god heard, but he stifled heavy groans
Within; the tears were futile that he shed.
To comfort him, his father, Jupiter,
Said this: “An end is set for everyone,
For life is brief and cannot be recovered.
But brave men, through their exploits, strive for fame
That lasts. Beneath Troy’s high walls many sons
Of gods died. My own child Sarpedon died there.
Fate calls: for Turnus too the race is ending.”
He turned his eyes from the Italian fields.
Pallas with all his great strength cast his spear
And snatched his bright sword from the hollow sheath.
The spear flew, pierced the layers of the shield,
And struck the breastplate at the shoulder’s rim,
Finally grazing Turnus’s massive form.
But he in turn deliberately aimed
His iron-­pointed pike and launched it, saying,
“See if my weapon is the one to stick.”
The spearhead, striking, shaking, pounded through
The shield—all of the bronze and iron sheets,
All of the bull’s-­hide layers wrapping it—
Into the breastplate, into that strong chest.
Out of the wound he tore the heated shaft,
But with it came the lifeblood and the soul.
Collapsing forward with a clash of arms,
He touched the hostile soil with blood-­daubed lips.
Turnus stood over him:
“Go tell Evander this, Arcadians:
I send him back the Pallas he deserves.
471–­Sarpedon: A Trojan son of Jupi­
ter. Jupiter reluctantly allowed him to be
killed by Patroclus at Troy (Iliad 16).

. 272 .

465

470

475

480

485

490

BOOK 10
The soothing tribute of a burial
I grant him. But he had a costly guest—
Aeneas.” With his foot he held the corpse down
And stripped the giant sword belt with the story
Of crime etched in—a wedding night that left
The bedrooms smeared with gore of slaughtered youths—
That Eurytus’ son Clonus had embossed
In gold, and Turnus now was thrilled to loot.
People know nothing of their fated future.
Their exaltation cannot stay in bounds.
The time would come when he’d give anything
Not to have touched the boy. He’d hate his plunder,
And hate this day. Pallas’ friends pressed in, wailing.
They laid him on his shield to haul away.
What grief, what glory will you take your father!
A single day brought war and death to you.
But you leave mountains of Rutulian corpses!
Not a mere rumor of disaster came
To Aeneas, but a trusty runner, pleading
For him to pull his comrades from death’s edge.
He reaped his furious way and made a broad path
To Turnus as he triumphed in fresh slaughter.
Aeneas as he ran kept seeing Pallas,
Evander, and their banquet for the stranger,
Their hands’ clasp. Now he seized the four young sons
Of Sulmo, then the four brought up by Ufens:
They were reprieved to serve as sacrifices
To ghosts: their captive blood would soak the pyre.
496–97–­the giant sword belt . . .
the story of crime: Pallas’ sword belt is
decorated with the myth of the Danaids,
the fifty daughters of Danaus who killed
their husbands on their wedding night.

495

500

505

510

515

520

504–­
He’d hate his plunder: The
sight of Pallas’s belt will drive Aeneas to
slay Turnus: 12.941–49.
519–­to serve as sacrifices: Achilles
did the same at the death of his companion Patroclus (Iliad 21).

. 273 .

BOOK 10
Ferociously, he cast a spear at Magus,
Who nimbly ducked—it passed above him, trembling.
He grasped Aeneas’ knees, entreating him,
“By your ancestral spirits and your hopes
For Iulus, spare me for my child and father.
Fine embossed silver by the hundredweight
Lies buried in my high house—pounds of gold too,
Worked and unworked. The Trojans still can win:
What difference is there in a single life?”
Aeneas gave this answer to his pleas:
“Let your sons have so many pounds of silver
And gold, since Turnus did away with bargains
In war the moment that he slaughtered Pallas.
My father’s ghost agrees, and so does Iulus.”
He seized the helmet, wrenching back the neck,
And stabbed him as he begged, up to the hilt.
Not far off was Haemonides, the priest
Of Apollo and Diana, in a headband
And fillets, radiant white robes, and emblems.
Aeneas chased him down and, looming darkly,
Sacrificed him. Serestus hauled the weapons
Away, a trophy for King Mars the Strider.
Caeculus, born of Vulcan’s line, and Umbro,
From Marsian mountains, rallied the Italians.
Aeneas stormed against them. With his sword
He lopped off Anxur’s hand—the round shield fell.
He’d shouted out some self-­deceiving boast.
Perhaps he dreamed about immortal fame,
Or reassured himself of gray old age.
Tarquitus, son of Dryope the nymph
537–­
Haemonides, the priest: Not
mentioned elsewhere.

525

530

535

540

545

550

542–­
King Mars the Strider: The
Latin epithet Gradivus is cognate with
gradior, “step.”

. 274 .

BOOK 10
And sylvan Faunus, strode with his bright weapons
Into Aeneas’ rage. He drew the spear back
And made the massive shield and breastplate useless.
The head was slung to earth before it finished
Its pleading, the warm body was kicked over,
And from his hardened heart Aeneas spoke:
“Lie there, you menace, so the best of mothers
Can’t hide your corpse beneath your father’s tomb.
You will be left for crows, or waves will sweep you
Beneath, where hungry fish will gulp your wounds.”
He turned to chasing Turnus’ vanguard: Lucas,
Antaeus, hearty Numa, fair-­haired Camers—
Son of brave Volcens, richest of Italians
In land, and lord of quiet Amyclae.
Just like Aegaeon’s hundred hands and arms,
His fifty fire-­belching chests and mouths,
When (in the story) fifty clanking shields
And fifty drawn swords fought Jove’s thunderbolts,
Aeneas swept the plain in savage triumph
Once blood was on his sword. He made a charge
Straight toward the breasts of Niphaeus’ four-­horse team.
They saw his long strides, heard his gruesome roaring,
And in their panic wheeled and tore away
Their chariot to the shore. Its driver toppled,
The brothers Lucagus and Liger entered
The fight, drawn by white horses, Liger driving,
Lucagus fiercely whirling his bare sword.
Galled by their fervent rage, Aeneas dashed
To loom before them, holding up his spear.

551–­Faunus: An Italian god of woods
and trees.
557–­Lie there, you menace: Vergil reworks the cruelty of Odysseus in Iliad 11

555

560

565

570

575

and of Achilles in Iliad 21, both of whom
denied their enemies proper burial.
565–­Aegaeon: One of the Giants,
also called Briareus.

. 275 .

BOOK 10
And Liger said,
“This is no Trojan plain, no chariot
Of Diomedes or Achilles. Your life
Ends with this war.” From Liger in his folly
These words flew. And the Trojan hero offered
Nothing in answer but to hurl his spear.
Lucagus leaned and, with his weapon’s side,
Slapped his team, but was poised to fight, his left foot
Thrust forward, as Aeneas’ pike breached all
The bright shield’s layers, to transfix his thigh.
He tumbled and rolled dying on the ground.
Righteous Aeneas spitefully addressed him:
“No routed team betrayed your chariot,
Lucagus, no false visions turned them from us.
No, you yourself jumped and abandoned them.”
He seized the reins. Poor Liger, once he’d fallen
From the same chariot, raised helpless hands:
“By your great self, by your proud parents too,
Leave me my breath, have pity, I am pleading.”
Aeneas stopped him. “You spoke differently
Not long ago. Die—don’t desert your brother.”
He slashed the chest, the hiding place of breath.
The Trojan chief went killing down the field
Rampantly, like a black storm or a whirlpool.
At last Ascanius and other troops
Broke from their fortress, as the siege had failed.
Meanwhile, Jove spoke forthcomingly to Juno:
“Sister—and darling spouse—you must be right:
Venus alone upholds the strength of Troy,
Just as you thought, and not their active hands,
And not their savage and unflinching hearts.”
Juno said pliantly: “My splendid husband,
582–­Diomedes or Achilles: That is,
Aeneas may have managed to escape Dio-

580

585

590

595

600

605

610

medes (10.28–29n.) and Achilles (Iliad
20), but he will not survive this time.

. 276 .

BOOK 10
Why do you taunt your weak browbeaten wife?
If you still loved me as you did—and should—
You’d surely do what lies in your great power,
And let me rescue Turnus from the fight
To send unharmed back to his father, Daunus.
No, let them put to death a blameless man,
Although he shares divine descent with us—
Pilumnus was his ancestor; although
He piled your shrine freehandedly with gifts.”
Briefly the king of high Olympus spoke:
“If what you beg is only a reprieve
For the doomed youth, if you accept my terms,
Send Turnus running from his looming fate:
So far I can concede. But if your pleas
Hide hopes of greater mercy, and you think
That the war’s end can change, you are mistaken.”
Juno wept. “If your thoughts grant what your words
Deny, if it’s ordained that he can live—!
No, either I’m deluded, or he’ll die
In unearned pain. I wish my fears deceived me—
Or you’d divert these plans—it’s in your power!”
But then she ringed herself in clouds and shot
Down from the sky, and drove a storm before her,
To the Laurentian camp and Trojan line.
From empty mist and thin and strengthless shadow
She fashioned an Aeneas—eerie marvel.
She copied Trojan arms, the shield, the crest
For his divine head, furnished vacant speech,
Sounds without thoughts. She made it stride like him—
The thing was like the fluttering ghosts in legends;
It looked like dreams that trick our sleeping senses.
The sneering image danced before the lines.
Taunting proud Turnus, teasing with its weapons.
Turnus closed in and hurled a hissing pike
And saw a back turned, saw withdrawing steps,

. 277 .

615

620

625

630

635

640

645

BOOK 10
As if Aeneas were in full retreat.
His heart was full of wild, deluded hope.
“Your wedding’s promised and you run away?
You sailed here seeking land: I’ll lay you on it.”
Shouting, he chased the thing and shook his sword,
But on the wind his triumph slid away.
Moored at a towering outcrop’s base, the ship
That brought Osinius from Clusium
Stood with its ladders out and gangplanks down.
The frightened bolting image of Aeneas
Dove in to hide there, never losing Turnus.
Nothing could slow him—up the plank he vaulted.
He reached the prow, and Juno broke the rope
And wrenched the ship out on retreating waves.
Aeneas, shouting for the absent Turnus,
Dispatched the many warriors in his way.
The fragile phantom now stopped seeking cover
And soared up, then it blended with black cloud.
A whirlwind carried Turnus far from shore.
Bewildered, and ungrateful to be safe,
He looked back, raised his hands and shouted starward,
“Almighty Father, have I earned this shame,
This punishment? Where am I being swept?
From where? And how? And how can I get back?
When will I see the town and camp again,
And that brave company that followed me?
They’re left—the outrage!—ringed by grisly death.
I’ll see them scattered, hear them fall and groan?
What will I do? What pit gapes deep enough
For me? No, pity me instead, you winds.
I beg you with my whole heart, drive this ship
Into the rocks or cliffs or deadly shallows,
Away from the Rutulians and my shame.”
And now two options wavered in his judgment:
Fall on his sword, maddened by his dishonor,

. 278 .

650

655

660

665

670

675

680

BOOK 10
And drive the brutal blade between his ribs?
Dive in mid-­ocean, try to reach the curved shore,
And face the Trojan weapons once again?
Three times he tried each course, three times great Juno
In heartfelt pity held the young man back.
Current and sea swell made a wafting path
Clear to his father Daunus’ ancient city.
Blazing Mezentius, urged on by Jove,
Joined the fight, charging at the cheering Trojans.
The Tuscan ranks closed in on him alone—
All of their hatred, all their crowding weapons.
He stood there like a rock in lonely waters,
Bare to the savagery of wind and waves,
To sea and sky’s unending pounding threats—
Unmoved. He brought down Dolichaon’s son,
Hebrus, then Latagus and timid Palmus.
Into the former’s face Mezentius
Cast an enormous mountain shard to halt him.
Palmus rolled helpless, tendons cut, and Lausus
Received his corselet and his crest to wear.
Phrygian Euanthes died, and Mimas also,
Paris’ friend: both were given life the same night
Through Amycus and Theano, and the queen,
Torch-­pregnant Hecuba. In his own city
One died; Laurentum’s shore holds one, a stranger.
Like a boar chased by snapping dogs from years
Of shelter in high, pine-­clad Vesulus,
Or the Laurentian lake, a forest pasture
Of reeds—but now the net encloses him;

688–­his father Daunus’ ancient city:
Ardea, his capital.
705–­Torch-­pregnant Hecuba: Before the birth of Paris Hecuba dreamed

685

690

695

700

705

710

of giving birth to a torch; Paris would go
on to bring about the fiery destruction of
Troy.

. 279 .

BOOK 10
Snarling, he takes a stand with bristling shoulders.
Who’s brave enough to bring his anger near?
They leave a space, throw spears, shout cautiously;
Fearless, he faces one way, then another,
Gnashing his teeth and shaking off the spears;
So righteous rage against Mezentius
Never found spirit for a charge with swords.
They harried him with long-­range spears and yells.
Acron, from ancient Corythus, a Greek,
Was banished from his wedding and his country.
Mezentius saw him far off, spreading havoc,
In his betrothed’s gifts, purple plumes and clothing.
A lion, maddened by his hunger, searches
Deep coverts—now he sees a fleeing goat
Or stag with towering horns, and spreads his jaws
Joyfully wide, bristles his mane, then crouches
Engrossed in entrails; on voracious lips
The grim gore oozes—
So keen Mezentius charged hostile throngs.
Unlucky Acron fell and kicked black earth
And stained the broken spear with dying blood.
The fighter wouldn’t stoop to kill the fleeing
Orodes with a spear throw to the back.
He dashed in front and met him man to man—
Superior in warcraft, not in stealth—
Felled him, and stepped on him to pull the spear out.
“Here great Orodes lies—one of their best.”
His troops yelled, echoing his victory chant.
Orodes gasped in death, “I’ll have revenge soon.
You won’t gloat long, whoever you might be.
The same fate, in this same field, waits for you.”
714–20–­The translator is following
R. D. Williams (The “Aeneid” of Virgil) in
reordering these lines.

. 280 .

717
718
714
715
716
719
720

725

730

735

740

BOOK 10
Anger infused Mezentius’ smile. “Die now.
The gods’ sire and the king of men will see
To me.” He yanked the spear free, and Orodes
Closed eyes that iron sleep, hard rest pressed down:
He entered endless night. Caedicus killed
Alcathoüs, Sacrator killed Hydaspes;
Rapos, Parthenius and iron Orses;
Messapus, Clonius, whom bolting horses
Sent sprawling, and Erichaetes as well,
Lycaon’s son, on foot—like Lycian Agis,
Dispatched by Valerus, brave as his grandsire;
Thonius next, by Salius—who fell
To Neacles, famed lancer, cunning archer.
Now heavy fighting balanced grief and slaughter
Between the sides. On both they won and lost,
Killed and went down, and neither would retreat.
The gods assembled in Jove’s palace pitied
Such futile rage, such dreadful human hurt.
Venus looked on, across from Saturn’s daughter,
As pale Tisiphone raved through those thousands.
Raging Mezentius, shaking a huge spear,
Strode on, as massive as Orion walking
Across the seafloor, in the deepest waters,
But towering above them from his shoulders;
Or bringing an old ash tree from a summit,
Feet on the earth, head hidden in the clouds.
Mezentius, like him, but hugely armored,
Advanced. Aeneas saw him in the long line
And started toward him. Stable in his huge bulk,
Calm, he awaited his brave enemy,
And gauged how far he had to throw his spear.
761–­Tisiphone: The leader of the
Furies.

745

750

755

760

765

770

763–­Orion: The mythological hunter,
made into a constellation by Jupiter on
his death.

. 281 .

BOOK 10
“Help me, hand that’s my god; help me, this spear
That’s poised! My son will be the monument—
My Lausus, draped in armor from that bandit,
Aeneas.” And he whipped a whistling spear
At long range. From the shield it glanced—flew—hit
Lovely Antores just above the groin:
Hercules’, then Evander’s follower,
Greek exile, settler in a local town;
A hapless proxy victim now, he gazed
Up at the sky and thought of darling Argos.
Then dutiful Aeneas’ spear slammed clear through
Mezentius’ domed shield of three bronze layers,
Three hides and linen padding. In the groin
It stuck, but not with force. It thrilled Aeneas
To draw Etruscan blood. He drew his sword
Eagerly, charging at his trembling target.
Lausus saw, and for love of his dear father,
He moaned. The tears were rolling down his face.
I won’t be silent here about your exploit
Or the hard death it brought—you’ve earned the telling,
Heroic boy—if we believe tradition.
Mezentius fell back helpless, hampered, dragging
The shield, the enemy’s spear lodged in it.
His youthful son now tore into the clash.
Aeneas reared and raised his sword to strike.
Lausus ducked in with a defensive stroke
That stopped him. The boy’s comrades came up nearer,
Shouting, and threw harassing spears to let
The father get away beneath the son’s shield.
Aeneas held out, raging in his shelter.
Just as when storm clouds hurtle down in hail,
773–­hand that’s my god: Mezentius,
the “wild scorner of the gods” (7.648)
worships only his own strength.

775

780

785

790

795

800

783–­dutiful: Another way of translating pius.

. 282 .

BOOK 10
And every plowing farmer runs for refuge,
And travelers find shelter in some stronghold—
A jutting riverbank, an arch of high rock—
Till at the rain’s end they resume their day
In sunlight; so beneath a pelting war cloud
Aeneas held up till its thunder died,
And only shot insulting threats at Lausus.
“Why do you rush to die here? You’re outmatched,
Dupe of your loyal love!” The boy paraded
In senseless triumph. In the Trojan leader
Rage mounted, and the Fates prepared to cut
The threads of Lausus’ life. Aeneas sank
The whole strong sword’s length in the young man’s belly,
First through the shield—flimsy to brag behind—
And the soft gold mail coat his mother’d woven.
Blood filled his breast. The soul slipped from his body
And through the air, departing for the shades.
But when Anchises’ son saw that pale face—
The dying face uncanny in its pallor—
He moaned in pity, stretching out his hand.
He saw in him his own love for Anchises.
“Poor boy! They call me ‘good.’ What will I give you
To match your courage? Your dear weapons—keep them.
And you I’ll send to the ancestral ashes
And spirits, if that matters to you now.
But this should solace your pathetic death:
It came from great Aeneas.” He berated
The boy’s troops, who were hanging back, and lifted
The body with its smooth-­combed bloodstained hair.
Meanwhile the father, at the Tiber’s banks,
814–15–­
the Fates prepared to cut
the threads of Lausus’ life: the job of
the Fates was to spin the threads of each
mortal life and measure and cut them
when the person was due to die.

805

810

815

820

825

830

825–­“good”: Another way of translating pius.

. 283 .

BOOK 10
Rinsed his wound, leaning weakly on a tree trunk.
Far away, his bronze helmet hung from branches;
His heavy weapons rested on the grass.
He gasped in pain, among his young retainers,
Head down, his combed beard trailing on his chest.
Often he asked how Lausus did, and ordered
Runners to call him to his wretched father.
His weeping friends brought Lausus’ massive body—
Massively wounded—lying on a shield.
Mezentius knew those groans and sensed disaster.
He dirtied his white hair with dust and raised
Both hands to heaven, then embraced the corpse.
“Did I have such delight in life, my child—
My own son—that I let you take my place
Against the enemy? Did these wounds save
Your father, living by your death? How dismal
My exile is at last, how deep my wound.
And it was me who smeared your name with guilt—
Me, hounded from the kingship of our fathers.
By any means they chose, I should have given
My guilty life to soothe my country’s hatred.
But still I haven’t left this world, this daylight—
Not yet.” He got up on his ruined thigh,
Unbeaten. Though the deep stab crippled him,
He had them fetch his horse—his pride and comfort,
Who brought him out of every fight a victor—
And to this grieving animal he spoke:
“Rhoebus, if anything lasts long for mortals,
Our life has. Triumphing with me today,
You’ll fetch that gory plunder, and Aeneas’
Head, which will be revenge for Lausus’ anguish.
And if we haven’t got the strength to do it,
850–­My exile: Mezentius had been
exiled for his cruelty (8.481–95).

. 284 .

835

840

845

850

855

860

865

BOOK 10
You’ll fall with me. Brave thing, I don’t believe
You’d take your orders from a Trojan master.”
He settled in his old place, with a sharp pike
Hefted in either hand, and his bronze helmet
Flashing beneath a bristling horsehair plume.
He dashed into the battle lines, his heart
Seething with shame and grief that drove him wild;
Spurred by mad passion and familiar courage.
Three times he yelled, “Aeneas!”—who then prayed
With joy: “Yes, Father of gods, and high Apollo!
Now—you, come grapple.”
He stopped before him, leveling a spear.
“My son is gone, you savage. What’s your threat?
That was the only way you could destroy me.
I don’t fear death. To me the gods are nothing.
Quiet then. Take these gifts before I die.”
He hastened in a spacious circle, launching
One weapon, then another, then one more,
And lodged them in the shield. The gold boss held,
The hero stood. Mezentius wheeled left
Three times and hurled more spears. Three times the Trojan
Pivoted with his shield—a ghastly forest.
Impatiently he pulled out all the barbs,
Under the pressure of unequal combat.
At last he charged straight out and flung a spear,
Which struck between the horse’s curving temples.
The creature reared up, battering the air.
The rider toppled, and the horse fell headlong,
Pinning him to the ground, his shoulder ripped.
Trojan and Latin shouts lit up the sky.
Up ran Aeneas, wrenching free his sword.
“Where’s fierce Mezentius now, his spirit’s violence?”
872–­The line is thought to be spurious.

. 285 .

870

875

880

885

890

895

BOOK 10
The Tuscan now lay coming to himself,
Gasping the sky in, gazing at the air.
“Cruel enemy—why sneering threats of death?
Killing’s no crime—I came here knowing that.
My Lausus made no pact with you to save me.
I ask one thing, though, if the beaten can:
Let the earth cover me. I am surrounded
By hatred from my people. Guard me from it,
Please, and let one tomb hold my son and me.”
He gave his throat on purpose to the sword
And poured his life out—waves of blood on armor.

. 286 .

900

905

BOOK 11

Dawn rose away from Ocean. Though Aeneas
Chafed to inter his friends, though he was tortured
By grief, he took the time, as morning broke,
To make his promised victory offerings.
He lopped the branches from a huge oak, set it
In a mound, decked it with Mezentius
The chieftain’s shining armor as a trophy
For the war god, attached the broken spear,
The blood-­soaked crest, the pierced and battered breastplate;
At its left side, the figure held the shield;
From the neck hung the ivory-­hilted sword.
Aeneas spoke to spur the Trojan leaders,
All cheering in a close-­packed crowd around him,
“Fighters, these first fruits, spoils a proud king yielded,
Are no small prize. Look forward, without fear.
This is Mezentius, work of my hands.
Now we’ll attack the Latin king and town.
Prepare for war with bold anticipation.
Don’t let fear, second thoughts, or callow minds
Render you slow and unprepared when gods
Consent to standards hoisted, troops led out.
Now we must give the earth our comrades’ bodies:
No other honor waits in Acheron.
Go, grant the final tribute to the great souls
Who won this country for us with their blood.
But first send Pallas to Evander’s city—
How it will mourn! An early death, a black day
23–­Acheron: The Underworld.

. 287 .

5

10

15

20

25

B O O K 11
Engulfed this warrior, who was no coward.”
He spoke in tears, then walked back to the doorway,
Where Pallas’ corpse was laid out. Old Acoetes
Guarded it, who had been Evander’s squire
Back in Arcadia, but with worse omens
Was sent with his dear foster child—around whom
His retinue now stood, with Trojan soldiers
And Trojan women, hair unbound in mourning.
And when Aeneas came beneath the high gates,
The people beat their breasts and raised a moan
To the stars; heavy grief rang through the king’s house.
When he saw Pallas’ ivory face, his propped head,
And the wide wound from the Italian spear point
In his smooth chest, Aeneas sobbed and spoke:
“My poor boy, were you all that changing fortune
Begrudged me? You will never see my kingdom
Or ride back to your father’s home in triumph.
This isn’t how I pledged to care for you
Before Evander, with farewell embraces,
Sent me to win a mighty realm, though warning
I’d fight a rugged nation and fierce soldiers.
Perhaps right now the king, a dupe of hope,
Heaps altars with his gifts, prays for your safety,
While—empty honor—we in grief escort
This youth, who now owes nothing to the gods.
How cruel, how pitiful to see his son dead!
Is this the glorious return we hoped for?
Is my great trust fulfilled? Yet you, his father,
Will see no wounded back, mark of a coward,
Or pray for death yourself because he’s living.
Italy, Iulus, what a shield you’ve lost!”
32–­Arcadia: Evander was originally from Arcadia, in Greece, before he
founded Pallanteum in Italy.

. 288 .

30

35

40

45

50

55

B O O K 11
He ordered them to raise the corpse they pitied.
Choosing a thousand men from all his forces,
He sent them to attend the final honors
And share the father’s tears—for such a great loss
Small comfort, yet it was that poor man’s due.
Others worked urgently to weave a bier
Out of soft oak-tree and arbutus branches;
To build a couch and leafy canopy.
High on this rustic bed they laid the boy out,
Like a plucked blossom in a young girl’s hand,
A drooping hyacinth or tender violet—
Its beauty and its brightness lingering,
But without food or strength from Mother Earth.
Aeneas brought two robes out, stiff with gold
And purple dye, made long ago by Dido
Of Sidon, happy in the task. Her own hands
Had worked the fine gold threads into the weave.
He chose one—sad last gift—and drew it up
Over the young man’s hair, which soon would burn.
He heaped up spoils from the Laurentian battle
And had them taken in a long procession,
Along with spears and mounts, the boy’s own plunder.
He’d bound the hands of captives, offerings
To the dead, for blood to sprinkle on the flames.
He had his captains carry tree trunks labeled
With hostile names, and hung with hostile arms.
Men led Acoetes, ruined by old age.
He clawed his face and bruised his chest with pounding
68–­
Like a plucked blossom in a
young girl’s hand: Echoes similes in
Sappho and Catullus; cf. the simile at
Euryalus’ death (9.435–37).
78–­Laurentian: here, Italian.
81–82–­He’d bound the hands of cap­
tives, offerings to the dead: See 10.519n.

60

65

70

75

80

85

83–­tree trunks: Tropaea, which gives
us the English word “trophy,” were used
to display military trophies in Vergil’s
day; cf. 11.5–11.

. 289 .

B O O K 11
And then fell forward, sprawling, on the earth.
Blood-­soaked Rutulian chariots filed by,
And then came Pallas’ warhorse, Aethon, stripped
Of ornaments, face soaked in his great tears;
Then the youth’s spear and helmet—Turnus claimed
The rest. Trojans, Arcadians, Etruscans,
Their arms reversed, came in a sad array.
And when this whole procession had filed forward
Aeneas stopped and gave a heavy sigh.
“This war doomed others I am called to mourn.
Farewell forever now, my splendid Pallas—
Bless you for all time.” Now the man fell silent
And walked back to his camp with its high walls.
Olive-­crowned legates from the Latin city
Were there to ask a favor: the return
Of slaughtered bodies scattered on the plain.
Would he now let an earth mound cover them?
Lightless, defeated, they were not at war;
He ought to show past hosts and in-­laws mercy.
Their pleas were not repulsed by good Aeneas—
Graciously he assented, and continued:
“How is it you’re caught up in this cruel war
You don’t deserve? Why do you run from friends?
Now for the sake of those who died in battle
You plead for peace. I’d give it to the living!
I only claim the home fate grants me here.
It’s not your people but your king I’m fighting,
Who broke our guest bond, trusting Turnus’ weapons—
It ought to have been Turnus facing death.
Aiming to fight this out and drive the Trojans
Away, he should have met me hand to hand
90–­face soaked in his great tears:
reworks Achilles’ horse weeping at the
death of Patroclus (Iliad 17).

90

95

100

105

110

115

105–­in-­laws: A glance to the future
intermarriage of Trojans and Latins, including Aeneas and Lavinia.

. 290 .

B O O K 11
And let a god or fighting skill decide it.
Go now, and light the pyres of your poor people.”
The men were stricken by his words; their eyes
Turned to each other, and they held their peace.
Old Drances, always hostile and accusing
Toward the young Turnus, spoke up in reply:
“Hero of Troy, great in your fame, but greater
In battle, how could I extol you more—
Admiring first your prowess or your justice?
We’ll gladly take your message to our city
And join you to our king, Latinus—Fortune
Allowing. Turnus needs his own alliance.
We’re happy to haul stones on our own shoulders
And raise the destined walls of your new Troy.”
They all roared their assent once he had finished.
A twelve-­day truce was made, and in its calm
Trojans and Latins roamed the woods and mountains
Unharmed together. Double axes rang
On high ash trees, and soaring pines were toppled.
Steadily, they split oak and fragrant cedar
With wedges; wagons groaned with mountain ash.
Now Rumor, who’d just told of Pallas’ triumph
In Latium, flew with early news of anguish
To blight Evander’s heart and house and city.
Snatching up torches for their ancient death rites,
Arcadians swarmed the gate. A row of flames
Stretched down the road; light split the land in two.
The retinue of Trojans joined their ranks
Of mourning. Matrons saw them reach the houses
And set the town alight with shouts of grief.
No one was strong enough to hold Evander.
122:–­Drances: A scheming politician,
used by Vergil as a foil to Turnus.

120

125

130

135

140

145

135–36–­Double axes rang on high
ash trees: See 6.180–82n.

. 291 .

B O O K 11
Where the bier stood, he pushed into the crowd
And fell on Pallas, crying, clinging, groaning.
At last his torment let a few words through:
“Pallas, this isn’t what you promised me,
Caution in trusting wild Mars with your life.
But I knew how a first campaign can be—
The sweet allure of glory when it’s new.
Sorry first offering, and hard first lesson
In war so close at hand! Not one god heard
My prayers and pledges. Oh, my blessèd wife,
Lucky in death, since you don’t feel this pain!
I’ve triumphed over death—outlived my son.
If only I had gone along and buried
My own life in the spears of the Rutulians,
And this procession brought me home—not Pallas!
Trojans, you’re not to blame, and not our friendship
Or treaty. For my old age this was fated.
Though he was bound to die, there will be comfort:
He killed so many thousand Volscians
And fell while leading Trojans into Latium.
And Pallas, I could wish no rites more worthy
Than good Aeneas and the Trojan lords,
The Tuscan captains, and the whole force give you.
They bring huge trophies of the men you slaughtered.
Turnus, you’d stand here too, a log with weapons,
If Pallas were your age, with strength to match it.
My grief, still, mustn’t hinder Trojan warfare.
Go, tell your king that with my Pallas gone,
I keep my hated life because he knows
His sword owes Turnus both to son and father.
His luck and heroism are for this.
167–­Volscians: Italians, allies of Turnus.

. 292 .

150

155

160

165

170

175

173–­a log with weapons: See 11.83n.

B O O K 11
My fate forbids me joy in life—but let me
Bring my son word among the dead below.”
Meanwhile, Dawn raised reviving light and summoned
Wretched mankind back to its work and hardship.
Father Aeneas on the curved shore now
Joined Tarchon to build pyres for each man’s dead,
For the old rite of burning. Kindling black flames,
They hid the towering sky in murky darkness.
In their bright armor, soldiers marched three times
Around the lighted pyres. Three times the horsemen
Circled the dismal fires and raised their wails.
Their tears rained on the weapons and the earth,
And warriors’ cries and horn blasts struck the skies.
Some threw in plunder torn from slaughtered Latins:
Helmets and fine swords, bridles, wheels that once
Seethed against axles. Other men gave gifts
The dead knew: their own shields and losing weapons.
Oxen were sacrificed to Death on all sides.
Bristly boars, livestock seized from every pasture
Bled from their throats into the fire. The beach
Was full of friends who watched friends burn and nursed
The half-­dead pyres and clung there till damp night
Wheeled round a sky bejeweled with burning stars.
Elsewhere the Latins too, in desolation,
Built countless pyres. Out of the throng of bodies,
Some were interred, some carried to the country
Nearby, and others sent back to the city.
The rest they burned, a heap of muddled carnage,
Uncounted and unhonored. Ravaged fields
Were glowing with an avid crowd of fires.
A third dawn swept away the chill of darkness.
The mourners leveled jumbled bones and ash piles
And heaped the warm earth on them in a mound.

. 293 .

180

185

190

195

200

205

210

B O O K 11
But in the homes of rich Latinus’ city
The drawn-­out shrieks of mourning were the loudest.
Here mothers and their sons’ poor wives and sisters,
Tenderly sorrowing, and orphaned children
Cursed the disastrous war and Turnus’ wedding:
He ought to fight it out since he demanded
Italy’s kingship and the highest honors.
Drances was there to goad them on, attesting
That Turnus had been challenged—no one else.
Yet Turnus had his various supporters;
He sheltered in the glory of the great queen
And could rely on fame from his own trophies.
And now, amid the flames of this contention,
Came this: from Diomedes’ famous city
The envoys brought an answer: that huge effort
Had failed; the fervid pleas, the gifts of gold
Did nothing—“They must find another ally,
Or ask the Trojan ruler for a truce.”
The massive blow crushed even King Latinus.
The anger of the gods and these fresh tombs
Left no doubt: it was fate that brought Aeneas.
Therefore he summoned all his people’s leaders,
His council, for a meeting in his halls.
They streamed together to the palace, filling
The streets, and as the eldest and the king,
Grim-­faced Latinus took the central seat.
He asked to hear what answer had come back
From the Aetolian city, every detail
From start to finish. Then, a call for silence;
213–­rich Latinus’ city: Laurentum.
218–­He ought to fight it out: That
is, in hand-­to-­hand combat with Aeneas.
223–­the great queen: Amata, Latinus’
wife and a staunch supporter or Turnus.
226–­
Diomedes’ famous city: The

215

220

225

230

235

240

city of Arpi. Venulus was sent there by
Turnus to request support from Diomedes against the Trojans (see 8.9).
240–­Aetolian city: Arpi, called Aetolian because Diomedes is from Aetolia in
northern Greece.

. 294 .

B O O K 11
Venulus, ordered to begin, reported:
“Citizens, we came safely through our journey
To Diomedes in his Argive camp
And touched the hand that brought Troy’s kingdom down.
We found him laying out a city, named
After his clan, in Iapygian country
He’s won near Garganus. Let in, let speak,
We proffered gifts and told our names and nation,
And who made war on us, and why we’d come
To Arpi. With a tranquil face, he answered:
‘O ancient, fortunate Italian races,
Kingdoms of Saturn. After your long peace,
What lures you, what incites you into war?
All of us who laid waste to Troy have paid
Horribly for our crimes throughout the world.
(And what of fighters sunk in Simoïs,
And all our anguish under those high walls?)
Priam would weep for us! Witness Minerva’s
Storm, and the vengeful cliff Caphereus.
We’re scattered to the world’s ends—Menelaus
Clear out to Proteus’ columns, and Ulysses
To Etna’s Cyclopes. And the short reign
247–48–­Iapygian country . . . Gar­
ganus: Part of Apulia, in southern Italy.
Garganus is a mountain on the upper
coast.
253–­Kingdoms of Saturn: Italy. The
god Saturn was said to have fled to Italy
after being overthrown by his son Jupiter:
see 8.319–23.
259–60–­Minerva’s storm . . . venge­
ful cliff Caphereus: Minerva destroyed
the Greek fleet because Ajax the Lesser
raped her priestess Cassandra at Troy
(2.403–6). He was shipwrecked at Cape
Caphereus on the island of Euboea,
drawn to the false lights erected by Nau-

245

250

255

260

plius to avenge his son Palamedes (see
2.81–85).
261–62–­Menelaus . . . Proteus’ col­
umns: Menelaus was driven to the island
of Pharos off the coast of Egypt, which
was ruled by Proteus, a sea god who had
the capacity to change shape. Proteus’
columns are the eastern analogue of the
columns of Hercules (Gibraltar) in the
west.
262–63–­Ulysses . . . Etna’s Cyclopes:
Odysseus (Ulysses) encountered the
Cyclops Polyphemus on Mount Etna in
Odyssey 9.

. 295 .

B O O K 11
Of Neoptolemus? Idomeneus’
Shattered home? Locrians in Libya?
The great Greeks’ Mycenaean leader reached
His threshold to be butchered by his wife.
He’d conquered Asia, but her lover lurked.
The gods begrudged me my ancestral altars,
My yearned-­for wife, and lovely Calydon.
I’m hounded even now by grisly visions
Of friends changed into birds that fluttered skyward
And now roam rivers—monstrous punishment:
The cliffs re-­echo with their sobbing calls—
But what was I expecting since the moment
I lost my mind and lunged at a divine form,
Profaning Venus’ right hand with a wound?
No, don’t urge more such battles—not on me.
Since Troy was overthrown, I have no quarrel
With Trojans. I did not enjoy those struggles.
Your country’s gifts you bring me—let Aeneas
Have them instead. I’ve fought him hand to hand,
Faced his cruel weapons. I know—so believe me—
How high he rears behind his shield, how fiercely
His spear whirls. Had Mount Ida’s country bred
Two more like him, Troy could have visited
On the Greek towns the mourning meant for Troy.
264–­Neoptolemus: Achilles’ son,
also called Pyrrhus. For his death see
3.330–32.
264–65–­Idomeneus’ shattered home:
The Cretan king Idomeneus prom­
ised
Nep­tune that if he returned home safely
from Troy, he would sacrifice the first
thing he saw—and duly sacrificed his own
son.
265–­
Locrians in Libya: Presumably Greeks shipwrecked in Africa by
Minerva’s storm.

265

270

275

280

285

266–­Mycenaean leader: Agamemnon, murdered by his wife, Clytemnestra, and her lover Aegisthus on his return
home to Mycenae.
270–­Calydon: A Greek city in Aetolia; Diomedes’ family is from there.
272–­
friends changed into birds:
Diomedes’ companions were said to have
been turned into seabirds.
276–­I lost my mind: In trying to
kill Aeneas at Troy, Diomedes wounded
Venus (Iliad 5).

. 296 .

B O O K 11
All that long siege of stubborn Ilium,
Ten years of victory stalling and retreating,
We owed to Hector and Aeneas only—
Both known for bravery and skill in war,
But one more righteous. Clasp hands, make a treaty:
You have the chance. Avoid a clash of arms.’
Sovereign, that sovereign sends you this reply,
And gives his view of this momentous war.”
He’d scarcely ceased—conflicting, anxious words
Raced among the Italians, like the roar
Of torrents choked by boulders, like the banks
Echoing back the clatter of the current.
But when the nervous crowd grew still, the king
Called on the gods, then spoke from his high throne.
“Latins, an early plan to meet this crisis
Would have been better than to call a meeting
Now, when the enemy blockades our walls.
How can we fight with children of the gods,
With these unwearying unconquered heroes?
Even when beaten, they don’t drop their swords!
Aetolian allies? Give that hope up now.
We all have hopes—you see what this one’s worth.
Everything else that’s ruined in our cause
You have before your own eyes—you can touch it.
I don’t blame anyone. You’ve reached the limits
Of courage, fought with all your nation’s strength.
Now listen while I tell you in a few words
The judgment that through all my doubts I’ve come to.
I have an old tract by the Tuscan river.
It stretches west, past the Sicanian border.

292–­one more righteous: Aeneas is
presented as superior even to the idealized Hector, thanks to his proto-­Roman
pietas.

290

295

300

305

310

315

316–­the Tuscan river: The Tiber.
317–­the Sicanian border: The Sicani
were an Italian people; cf. 7.795, 8.328.

. 297 .

B O O K 11
Auruncans and Rutulians plow and sow
Its hard hills; on the roughest heights their herds graze.
I’ll give it, and a strip of pine-­strewn summit,
In friendship to the Trojans. We must make
Fair terms with them and let them share the kingdom.
If they’re so eager, they can raise their walls
And settle. If it’s other lands they want,
And they’re allowed to leave our soil, we’ll build them
Twenty ships from our own Italian oak.
If they can man more, wood is on the coast.
How many boats, what kind of boats, they’ll tell us.
And we’ll supply the labor, bronze, and dockyards.
I’ll also send the hundred noblest Latins
To take the news and finalize the treaty.
These will present the olive boughs of peace,
And gold and ivory in standard measures,
And emblems of this reign, the robe and throne.
Confer together, save us from disaster.”
Drances, still hostile, rose; half-­hidden envy
Of Turnus’ stature galled him; he was lavish
With goods, and in his eloquence a hero—
But not in war—valued as an adviser,
A rabble-­rouser, though; his mother’s bloodline
Was splendid, though his father’s was obscure.
He now spoke, heaping up the fire of hatred:
“Good king, to all of us your plan makes sense.
What can I add? Everyone should acknowledge
Our town’s way forward, but they’re all too frightened.
He needs to stop his rants and let me speak.
Wayward and evil-­omened—let him threaten
A bloody death for saying this—he brought down
All those fine leaders, sank this town in grief,
When he attacked the Trojan fortress, shaking
His sword at heaven, though prepared to run.
Add one gift to the many that you send

. 298 .

320

325

330

335

340

345

350

B O O K 11
And promise to the Trojans, peerless king:
You are a father—get a splendid son
By giving him your daughter. Don’t let threats
Deter you. Make the bond of peace eternal.
And if we’re terrified, let’s make our pleas
To Turnus here, and ask him, as a favor,
To let this king and country have their rights.
You are a curse on Latium! Why keep throwing
Your hapless people into open peril?
Turnus, the war can’t save us. We all beg you
For peace—which has one guarantee, so give it.
You say I hate you (shouldn’t I?)—but see,
I am the first to kneel. Pity your country.
Lay down your pride. You’re beaten—you should go.
We’re routed, slaughtered, so much land is razed—
If you want fame, and if your will’s so hard,
And if you need a palace as a dowry,
Meet your opponent face to face, with courage.
But no: to get a royal wife for Turnus,
We’ll scatter our cheap lives across the plain,
Unwept, unburied. If you have the strength
Or courage that your fathers had, go face
Your challenger.”
This kindled the ferocity of Turnus.
He growled, and these words broke from deep within him:
“Drances, your eloquence just overflows
Whenever war needs fighters. You arrive first
At each assembly. Your majestic words
Fill it while you stay safe, while earthworks bar
The enemy, and moats don’t fill with blood.
So thunder on as usual and call me
A coward when as many heaps of Trojans
Have died by your hand, when your splendid trophies
355–­your daughter: Lavinia.

. 299 .

355

360

365

370

375

380

385

B O O K 11
Litter the plain. Try for yourself what courage
And energy can do. We needn’t look far:
The enemy are all around our walls.
Shall we go face them now? Or will your fighting
Stay limited to feet that bolt, a tongue
Gusting away?
Me—beaten? Oh, you worm—who’d say that, seeing
The Tiber swelling with the blood of Trojans,
Arcadian armor stripped, Evander’s house
Brought down, without an heir? Does Bitias,
Does Pandarus, that giant, find me beaten?
The thousands I subdued and sent to Hades
While penned inside their walls and earthworks? War
Can’t save us? Chant these omens to the Trojans—
And to your own self, madman. Keep on muddling
Our plans with terror: that twice-­beaten nation
So powerful, our Latin arms so frail!
Myrmidon chiefs, Achilles from Larissa,
And Diomedes quake! The Aufidus
Retreats, flows backward from the Adriatic!
There’s more—this cunning bastard, when I taunt him,
Shams fear; it gives his allegations force.
My hand won’t take a soul like yours—don’t worry.
Keep it there, living in your worthless self.
Now to your grave deliberations, father.
If you can place no further hope in fighting,

395–96–­Bitias . . . Pandarus: Trojan
brothers killed by Turnus (9.672–756).
401–­twice-­beaten nation: Troy was
sacked twice; first by Hercules, then by
the Greeks.
403–­Myrmidon chiefs: Troops of
Achilles.
403–­Larissa: The chief city of Thessaly.

390

395

400

405

410

403–4–­There may be spurious material here (“Achilles from Larissa / and
Diomedes”; see line 404 in the Latin).
404–­Aufidus: The river Aufidus
(today’s Ofanto) runs through Apulia.
410–­father: Turnus considers himself betrothed to Latinus’ daughter La‑
vinia.

. 300 .

B O O K 11
If we’re abandoned, if from one retreat
Ruin prevails, and Fortune can’t turn back,
Let’s hold our weak hands out and beg for peace.
I long for any trace of our past courage,
And I prefer the man who won’t surrender,
Who’d rather bite the dust, once and for all:
He has the most heart, he’s most blessed in hardship.
But still we have supplies, and men to call on,
And allied towns and tribes in Italy;
The Trojans got their glory with a bloodbath:
The same storm fell on them, they have their losses.
Why shamefully give in already, quaking
Down to our toes before the trumpet sounds?
Often the changing work of shifting time
Brings good again. Commonly, Fortune alters
And sets her victims back on steady ground.
Arpi and its Aetolian king won’t help us;
Lucky Tolumnius, Messapus, leaders
From many towns will. Latium’s chosen troops,
Laurentum’s farms will get no petty fame.
And there’s Camilla of the noble Volsci
Leading her mounted squadrons, bright with bronze.
If Trojans challenge me to single combat,
And you say yes, since I’m our stumbling block,
I’m willing. Victory hasn’t yet rebuffed me:
No matter what the risk, to me it’s worth it.
He’s greater than Achilles and wears armor
Like his, which Vulcan made? I still will face him.
I’m Turnus, I’m the equal of my forebears.
To all you here, and to my future father,
I’ve vowed my life. I beg for single combat!
I don’t want Drances paying with his death
432–­Camilla of the noble Volsci: She
was introduced at 7.803: see note.

. 301 .

415

420

425

430

435

440

B O O K 11
For the gods’ rage—or getting any glory.”
And so they wrangled in this time of danger.
Meanwhile, Aeneas moved his camp and forces.
The news sped through the palace, spreading uproar;
The city soon was overwhelmed with terror:
The Trojans and the Tuscans had deployed
Beside the Tiber and swept down the plain.
The common people were appalled and stricken
And stung into an even greater anger
And fevered calls for arms; youths roared for arms,
And fathers wept in fear. A racket rose
From all sides to the sky, a storm of discord;
As a flock clatters, settling in some tall grove,
Or swans call hoarsely as they pass above
Padusa river’s teeming, sounding shallows.
Turnus then seized his chance: “Yes, citizens!
Let’s call a meeting and sit praising peace
While they invade our land.” He said no more
But rushed away, out of the towering building.
“Volusus, call the Volsci, arm their squadrons,
Bring the Rutulians! Coras, with your brother!
Messapus! Spread your horsemen on the plain.
Block the approaches too, and man the towers.
The rest can follow me in the attack.”
Now the whole town stampeded to the walls.
Himself, the lord Latinus, in this crisis,
Fled the assembly, put off great endeavors,
Contrite that he’d not taken in Aeneas
Straight off, as son-­in-­law and city sharer.
458–­Padusa: A marshy channel of
the river Po.

445

450

455

460

465

470

464–­
Coras, with your brother:
Ca­til­lus, commander of the Tiburtines,
named at 7.672.

. 302 .

B O O K 11
They ditched below the gates and hauled in boulders
And spikes. The trumpet hoarsely called for blood.
Everyone came out: mothers and their children
Stood on the walls in an uneven line.
To Pallas’ temple on the heights the queen drove
With offerings, and matrons thronged around her.
Beside her was the girl Lavinia
(Cause of the havoc), looking down with fine eyes.
With gifts of incense, women sought the shrine;
Their sorrow echoed from the looming door.
“Strong-­weaponed chief of war, Tritonian virgin,
Shatter the Phrygian pirate’s spear and stretch him,
Face in the dirt, before our city gates.”
Fierce and impatient, Turnus dressed for battle.
Already he had on a ruddy breastplate
Bristling with scales, and gold greaves—though his head
Was still bare—and a sword hung at his side.
Bright with gold, from the stronghold’s heights he raced,
In thrilled anticipation of the fight,
As a horse breaks his rope, bolts from the barn,
And gains the open flatlands, finally free,
And gallops to the mares that crowd the pastures,
Or to the river that he used to bathe in,
Arching his neck exuberantly high,
While his mane plays across his neck and withers.
Royal Camilla with her Volscian force
Hurried to meet him. Right outside the gates
She now dismounted; her battalion likewise

477–­Pallas’ temple: An echo of Trojan matrons supplicating Athena during
the siege of Troy in Iliad 6.
480–­looking down: A sign of her
modesty.

475

480

485

490

495

500

483–­Tritonian virgin: Minerva was
said to have been born near the African
lake Tritonis.
484–­Phrygian pirate: Aeneas; cf.
“bandit” at 10.775.

. 303 .

B O O K 11
Jumped down and stood before her as she spoke:
“If courage brings the confidence it should,
I’ll undertake to face Aeneas’ horsemen,
And ride alone against the mounted Tuscans:
I’ll go to meet the hazards of this war.
You take a stand on foot and guard the walls.”
A formidable girl—Turnus was staring:
“Glory of Italy! How could I thank you
Or decently repay you? But we know
Your matchless spirit: let me share your efforts.
Rumors, backed up by scouts, tell us Aeneas
Has insolently sent ahead light horsemen
To scour the plains. He’s coming to the city
Himself, across the steep unguarded ridge.
I plan an ambush at a covered path,
With armed guards in the woods, at both ways out.
Draw up your troops to meet the Tuscan horse charge,
With keen Messapus, and Tiburtus’ corps,
And Latin cavalry. Take joint command.”
He roused Messapus and the allied captains
Likewise, then set off toward his enemy.
There is a twisting valley—or a trap—
Darkly and thickly overgrown; two cliffs
Crowd from its sides; a wispy path leads in,
And at both ends the jaws are grim and narrow.
Above, among the soaring lookout places,
There is a hidden clearing, good for cover
To strike from, swooping from the left and right;
Boulders can be sent rolling down the slopes.

518–­Tiburtus: Gave his name to the
city of Tibur. See 7.670–71.
522–­There is a twisting valley: The
passage resembles Livy’s description of

505

510

515

520

525

the Caudine Forks, where the Romans
were penned in by the Samnites and
forced to surrender in 321 BCE.

. 304 .

B O O K 11
Swiftly, by a familiar route, the young man
Arrived and took his lurking woodland post.
Where the gods live above, Latona’s child
Now spoke these words of sorrow to swift Opis,
One of her sacred retinue of virgins.
“For all the good they’ll do her, my Camilla
Takes up my arms and marches to cruel war.
She is my favorite, and my love for her
Is no new charm or impulse for my soul.
Deposed through hatred of his tyranny,
Metabus left the ancient town, Privernum.
Escaping from rebellion into exile,
He took his infant daughter, called Camilla
(A small change from her mother’s name, Casmilla),
And struck out toward bleak woods along the mountains,
The child clutched in his arms. Volscian troops swarmed
On all sides, sniping at him savagely.
The Amasenus foamed beyond its banks
And trapped him—so much rain had burst the clouds.
He was prepared to swim but hesitated
In fear for his dear burden. He was forced
To make a rapid choice among his options:
In his strong hand, the warrior had a pike
Of seasoned hard oak with a mass of knots.
He wrapped his child in woodland cork-­tree bark
And deftly tied her halfway down the shaft,
Poised it in his great fist, and called to heaven:
“Latona’s pure kind daughter, forest dweller,

530–­the young man: Turnus.
532–33–­
Latona’s child . . . Opis:
Diana is Latona’s daughter; Opis is one
of her companions.

530

535

540

545

550

555

540–­Privernum: A Volscian city conquered by Rome in the late fourth century BCE.

. 305 .

B O O K 11
A father vows his child to you. It’s your spear
She holds first; at your mercy, she’s escaping.
I trust her to the risky air, so claim her!”
His arm drew back; he sent the weapon hurtling.
The water roared. Above the rapid river
Flew poor Camilla on the hissing spear.
Metabus, as the hostile band drew close,
Dove in and—triumph—plucked Diana’s gift,
His daughter, from the other grassy bank.
No walls, no homes of cities took him in—
But such a savage wouldn’t have submitted.
In lonely highlands, shepherds’ haunts, his life passed.
And there, among the thickets and the beasts’ lairs,
He milked a half-­wild brood mare from the herd
Between his daughter’s tender lips, to nurse her.
And when the baby’s steps first pressed the ground,
He placed a sharp spear in her hand and hung
A bow and quiver from her tiny shoulder.
No trailing robe and no gold snood for her:
A tiger skin was on her neck and back.
Already her soft hand flung childish weapons.
On a resistless leash she whirled a sling
To bring down a Strymonian crane or swan.
Throughout the Tuscan cities many mothers
Wanted her for their sons. She was content
With me, and longed to stay a virgin huntress,
Untouched. If she weren’t caught up in this struggle,
And so determined to harass the Trojans,
She would be with me still, a cherished comrade.
Go, since a bitter fate is tracking her,
Glide from these heights, visit the Latin country,
Where the ill-­omened ghastly fight is starting,
And take this quiver: an avenging arrow
Must claim as much blood from the soldier wounding
Her sacred body—Trojan or Italian.

. 306 .

560

565

570

575

580

585

590

B O O K 11
I’ll take her poor corpse in a cloud, its armor
Unplundered, and entomb it in her country.”
Opis sailed lightly down through airy heaven,
Veiled in a storm cloud—but her weapons rang.
The Trojan muster now approached the walls,
With Tuscan chiefs and all the cavalry
Counted into their units. Horses pranced
And neighed and swerved and yanked resisting reins
Everywhere on the plain. An iron crop
Bristled, raised spears flamed clear across the plain.
The Latins and Messapus hurried forward;
Camilla’s wing and Coras with his brother
Appeared among them, charging, thrusting spears
Forward and back, and shaking javelins.
The men and neighing horses blazed ahead,
But stopped, a spear throw’s distance from each other,
Then raised a shout and urged their stormy horses
Into the center. Weapons poured from all sides
As thick as snow, and wove the sky in shadow.
Now fierce Aconteus raced in—Tyrrhenus met him;
They rammed their spears and were the first to fall,
With great noise, as their horses’ breasts collided,
Smashing the ribs, and like a thunderbolt
Or catapulted rock, Aconteus
Was hurled away. His soul seeped through the air.
The Latin army turned in sudden panic,
Shields on their backs, and galloped to the walls.
Asilas led the Trojan squad that chased them.
Nearing the gates, the Latins gave the war cry
Again, and turned their horses’ pliant necks.
The Trojans beat a long, free-­reined retreat.
The rocking, swelling surf makes such assaults,
Rushes to land, with foamy waves on high rocks,
Arches to flood the beach to its far edge,
Then retreats, pulling back the spinning stones

. 307 .

595

600

605

610

615

620

625

B O O K 11
In froth; the water thins, the shore is bare.
Twice, Tuscans drove Rutulians toward the city,
And twice were forced to flee, shields at their backs.
The third encounter saw their whole front lines
Embroiled, as every man fixed on another.
Truly the dying groaned then; sunk in blood,
Weapons and bodies rolled, with half-­dead horses
Soaked in men’s gore, as bitter fighting surged.
Orsilochus stayed clear of Remulus,
But lodged his pike beneath the horse’s ear.
The beast, in rage and agony, reared high,
Lashing its forelegs while its fallen master
Writhed on the ground. Catillus took down Iollas,
Herminius next, great in his bulk and weapons
And nerve. His breast and tawny head were bare—
Fearless, he left his giant body open
And let a spear transfix his massive shoulders.
Quivering, he was doubled up in pain.
Black gore flowed everywhere. They fought, they stabbed,
They killed, and through their wounds sought splendid death.
Amazon-­like, Camilla, with her quiver
And one breast bared, reveled amid the slaughter,
Now showering a hail of pliant spears,
Now with a strong ax in her tireless fist.
Diana’s gold bow clattered on her shoulder.
Even when pressured, giving ground, pursued,
She turned around and aimed her arrows backward.
Her retinue was choice: the girls Larina,
Tarpeia, Tulla shaking her bronze ax—

636–­Remulus: A Latin soldier (not
the same as at 9.593).
649–­
one breast bared: Amazons
fought with a breast bared or even amputated to make archery easier.

630

635

640

645

650

655

654–­
aimed her arrows backward:
A technique used by the Parthians, eastern enemies of Rome famed for their skill
in archery.

. 308 .

B O O K 11
Italians bright Camilla picked to serve her
Staunchly, her ornaments in peace and war:
Like Amazons who gallop in the shallows
Of Thermodon, Hippolyta’s companions
In painted armor, or like female ranks
With crescent shields who wildly whoop to praise
Penthesilea as she comes from battle.
Hard girl, who did you first unhorse, who last?
How many lay there dying from your blows?
Clytius’ son Eunaeus was the first:
Her long fir shaft impaled his naked chest.
He spewed blood, falling, gnawed the gory earth,
And writhed and curled around his wound in death.
Then she killed two, when Liris’ horse collapsed
And threw him as he grappled for the reins,
And Pagasus, bare-­handed, tried to catch him;
They fell together; then she killed Amastrus,
Hippotas’ son. Her hard-­flung shafts chased Chromis,
Tereus, Harpalycus, Demophoön.
For every dart the virgin’s hand sent hurtling,
A Phrygian died. The hunter Ornytus,
Far off, rode an Apulian mount; his armor
Was strange: for war he covered his broad shoulders
With skin ripped from a bull and kept his head safe
In a wolf ’s giant gaping mouth and white teeth.
His weapon was a country pike. He shifted
Through the squads’ center, but a head above it.
She caught him easily, amid the rout,
And spoke with hate above his skewered body:
“Tuscan, did you imagine you were hunting

659–63–­Amazons . . . Hippolyta . . .
Penthesilea: Hippolyta and Penthesilea
were famous Amazon queens; the latter
fought at Troy and was killed by Achilles.

660

665

670

675

680

685

664–­Hard girl, who did you first un­
horse, who last?: Here begins Camilla’s
aristeia.

. 309 .

B O O K 11
In woodland? On this day a woman’s weapons
Refute your boasts. Yet it’s my spear that kills you:
You’ll take this glory to your fathers’ ghosts.”
Straight off, she killed Orsilochus and Butes,
Huge Trojans, spearing Butes from behind
On the white strip of neck that gleamed, defenseless,
While he rode, spear slung down from his left shoulder.
Chased in a broad ring by Orsilochus,
She doubled back inside it—now she chased him—
Then rose to hammer with her sturdy ax
Through armor into bone, though he kept begging
To live. The warm brains splattered on his face.
Aunus’ son, warrior from the Apennines,
A great Ligurian while his fate permitted
His tricks, now froze to find himself before her.
He knew he couldn’t turn aside the princess
Or get away, however fast his mount.
Quickly he plotted what to do and spoke:
“What’s so remarkable? A woman trusting
Her strong horse to protect her? Send him off.
Arm for a fair fight, hand to hand, on foot.
You’ll soon find out how emptily you boasted.”
Stung with the taunt, she handed off her horse
In rage, and took a bold stance, armed like him
With a foot soldier’s naked sword and plain shield.
The young man thought his trickery had worked.
Without a moment’s pause, he wheeled his horse
And sped it in retreat with iron spurs.
“Ligurian, full of nothing but yourself!
Your native cunning won’t work here and send you
Home safely to your swindling father, Aunus.”
700–701–­fate permitted his tricks:
The Ligurians had a reputation in antiquity as treacherous liars.

. 310 .

690

695

700

705

710

715

B O O K 11
The virgin spoke. On foot, as swift as fire,
She ran his horse down. Facing it, she seized
The reins and took his hated blood in vengeance
Easily, as a sacred falcon leaves
Its cliff to soar and chase a dove in high clouds,
Catches it tight, and guts it with hooked talons,
Till blood and torn-­out feathers fall from heaven.
The gods’ and mortals’ father, sitting throned
On high Olympus’ peak, observed with keen eyes.
The patriarch now spurred Etruscan Tarchon
To fury and the savagery of battle.
Through slaughter and collapsing lines the man rode,
With varied shouts to goad the squads. He called
Each man by name, regrouping them for battle.
“Etruscans, always useless, never shamed,
What terror grips your cringing heart today?
A woman drives our ranks in rout and chaos.
Don’t you know what to do with swords and spears?
For love and your campaigns at night, you’re eager,
For dances Bacchus’ curving flute announces.
The tables will be rich with food and wine
(Your guiding passion) when an augur sanctions
Victory rites, and a greasy offering calls you
To the tall groves.” He wheeled, spurred toward the center,
Prepared to die. He plunged at Venulus
And tore him from his horse, clasped his opponent
With all his strength, and sped away. A shout
Rose to the sky, and all the Latins watched:
Tarchon blazed down the broad field with his captive,
Weapons and all; he snapped the spearhead off
And groped for some unguarded place to thrust it
721–­sacred falcon: Sacred because
their flight patterns were observed for
augury, bird divination.

720

725

730

735

740

745

737–­
Bacchus’ curving flute: The
tibia, used in ecstatic worship of Bacchus.

. 311 .

B O O K 11
Lethally. Venulus fought back and blocked
Stabs to his throat. Strength against strength, they grappled.
A tawny eagle soaring with a snake
Snatched from the ground and fastened in its claws—
In twisting coils, the wounded creature flails,
Raises its spiky scales and rears its head,
Hissing; its captor gouges at these struggles
With a hooked beak, while beating through the sky’s heights:
So Tarchon fetched his prize from Tibur’s lines,
Elated. When his Tuscans saw this exploit,
They charged. Fate’s hand had come to rest on Arruns.
Craftily he kept circling swift Camilla,
Clutching his spear and looking for his chance.
Wherever in the fighting’s midst the girl raged,
Arruns came after, softly tracking her.
Where she beat down opponents and withdrew,
The young man slyly turned his horse to follow.
He tested this and that way all around,
Shaking his deadly spear, unstoppable.
Cybele’s votary and former priest,
Cloreus, stood out bright in Phrygian armor.
He spurred a foam-­mouthed horse whose leather trappings
Had bronze scales linked by gold in feather patterns.
He wore exotic red and splendid purple
And shouldered a gold Lycian bow, with arrows
From Sicily. The helmet of the priest
Was gold, a gold brooch caught his linen cloak
In rustling saffron folds. Embroidery
Covered his tunic and barbarian leggings.
The huntress, longing to nail Trojan weapons
On a shrine’s door or wear proud captive gold,
759–­Arruns: An Etruscan name belonging to the Tarquin dynasty that

750

755

760

765

770

775

provided the fifth and seventh kings of
Rome.

. 312 .

B O O K 11
Picked the man out of all that strife and tracked him
Blindly and recklessly across the phalanx—
On fire with a woman’s love of plunder.
This was when Arruns saw a chance to trap her
At last. He raised his spear and prayed to heaven:
“Holy Soracte’s keeper, great Apollo,
Tuscans revere you most: our heaps of pine logs
Feed your fire; we go barefoot through the flames
And deep coals, trusting in our piety.
Almighty father, let my weapon cancel
Our army’s shame. I want no arms, no trophy—
No spoils at all. I’ll get my glory elsewhere.
I’d strike this noxious bitch down and return,
Gladly obscure, back to my homeland’s cities.”
Apollo heard. Part of the prayer he granted;
The rest he scattered to the fluttering breeze.
He let him kill Camilla in an ambush,
But not return again to his proud nation—
That plea went gusting to the southern gales,
So when the spear he launched snapped through the air,
The Volscians, all avidly alerted,
Looked toward their princess. But she didn’t notice
The air, the sound, the weapon from the sky,
Until it found its goal beneath her bared breast,
Drove deep, and lodged, and drank her virgin blood.
She fell; dismayed, her retinue ran in
To hold her up. Arrun’s alarm was greatest:
Fear marred his joy. He fled, no longer willing

782–­a woman’s love of plunder: Vergil’s essentialism here, claiming love of
plunder to be a feminine trait, is contradicted by his showing Euryalus attracted
to shiny spoils (9.359–74).

780

785

790

795

800

805

785–­Holy Soracte: Apollo had a
temple near Mount Soracte in Etruria.

. 313 .

B O O K 11
To trust his spear or meet the young girl’s weapons—
As, far ahead of hateful armed pursuers,
A wolf slinks quickly off to trackless heights;
He knows how rash he was to kill a shepherd
Or bulky ox; between his legs his tail shakes
And strokes his belly as he seeks the woods:
So Arruns in his terror slunk from view,
And merged into the ranks, content with safety.
Dying, she yanked the spear: the iron point
Was wedged deep in the wound, between her ribs.
She bled, she slumped down, and her eyes were closing
In death’s chill. From her face the blush was gone.
Breathing her last, she singled Acca out
And spoke to her—this was the most devoted
Comrade she had, and her sole confidant.
“Sister, my strength is gone. This bitter wound
Has finished me, and everything grows dark.
Make your escape—take Turnus this last message:
‘Step in, and keep the Trojans from the city.’
And now good-­bye.” The reins had dropped. She tumbled
To earth and was released from her cold body
Slowly. She bent her head and laid it down,
Conquered by death, and let her weapons go.
An angry groan—her life fled to the shades.
Then an immense shout rose and struck the gold stars.
After her fall, the fight grew raw. The whole force
Of Trojans, Tuscan chiefs, Evander’s horsemen
Out of Arcadia stormed into one mass.
Opis, Diana’s spy, had sat a long time
And watched the battle from a mountaintop.
But when, among the far-­off shouting frenzy
Of troops, a ruthless death brought down Camilla,
She groaned and spoke from deep within her heart:
“This is too hard a punishment, poor girl,

. 314 .

810

815

820

825

830

835

840

B O O K 11
For your attempt to harry Teucrians!
You served Diana in the lonely thickets,
Our quiver on your shoulder—what good now?
But even at the end your queen won’t leave you
Unhonored. All the world will praise your death
And know you didn’t shamefully lack vengeance.
Whoever gave you that outrageous wound
Should die—and will.” Below the mountain, shadowed
By holm oaks, was Dercennus’ tomb, a huge mound.
(In ancient times he’d been Laurentum’s king.)
Swiftly and gracefully, the goddess leapt there,
And stood and gazed at Arruns from on high.
His armor glinted, and he swelled with swagger.
“Why do you turn and go? Come over here,
And get the prize Camilla’s death has earned you.
But are you worth an arrow of Diana?”
The Thracian goddess took a speedy shaft
From her gold quiver. Full of rage, she drew
The bow out till its curving ends converged.
Her right hand on the string against her breast
And, at the iron point, her left were level.
In one short moment Arruns heard the sizzle
Of the dart’s flight and felt its iron lodge.
His comrades didn’t notice, and they left him
Groaning his last breaths on the dusty plain.
Opis flew off to heavenly Olympus.
Camilla’s light-­armed squadron fell back first,
Rutulians next, with keen Atinas, routed.
The leaders scattered from their regiments;
Everyone galloped toward the walls and safety.
Nobody could hold out against the onrush
Of deadly Trojan arms, no one could fight them,
But threw their unstrung bows on weary shoulders,
And hoofbeats’ rhythms shook the soft-­earthed plain.

. 315 .

845

850

855

860

865

870

875

B O O K 11
Black dust rolled toward the walls, a murky tumult.
Mothers on lookout towers beat their breasts
And raised a female cry clear to the stars.
The enemy swarmed in among them, hounding
Those who first rushed the open gates. Their threshold
Became a sorry death trap. With their snug homes
And nation’s walls around, they choked out life,
Impaled. Some closed the gate—they didn’t dare
Let pleading comrades in. Now there was carnage
Of those who slashed and stabbed to block the portal
And those stampeding in against their weapons.
Their weeping parents watched some locked-­out soldiers,
Shoved by the rout, roll headlong into ditches,
Or spur and slack their reins to batter blindly
At those unyielding barriers, the gates.
The very mothers on the walls, who’d witnessed
Camilla’s love of country, tried to match her.
In their alarm, they hurled down posts of oak wood
And stakes singed hard in place of iron weapons.
They longed to die first in the town’s defense.
Acca found Turnus in the woods and gave him
The brutal news of that tremendous havoc:
The Volscian lines smashed, and Camilla fallen,
Enemies sweeping with rapacious triumph,
Unstoppable, a rout that reached the walls.
In rage (and by Jove’s hard will), he deserted
His station in the close-­grown upland forest.
Just when he’d left his lookout for the plains,
Father Aeneas reached the unwatched pass,
Emerged from the dark woods and crossed the ridge.
Both hurried toward the town with all their forces—
And no long measure of a gap between them.
Aeneas spotted the Laurentian columns
Down the dust-­smoking plain, and right then Turnus,

. 316 .

880

885

890

895

900

905

B O O K 11
Hearing the tramp of feet and snort of horses,
Recognized fierce Aeneas under arms.
They would have made an instant trial of battle,
But ruddy Phoebus plunged his weary team
Into the Spanish sea, day slipped to night.
They camped before the town, constructing ramparts.

914–­the Spanish sea: I.e., the Atlantic, where the sun could be seen to set.

. 317 .

910

915

BOOK 12

As soon as Turnus saw the Latins shattered,
And felt their stares demand he keep his pledge,
His spirit filled with unrelenting flame—
As on the plains of Punic Africa
A lion wounded in the breast by hunters
Relishes going into war at last,
Tosses his mane and snaps the planted spear,
Unflinching, roaring with his bloody mouth.
So Turnus’ savagery was set alight.
In wild disorder he addressed the king:
“I’m ready now. Why should Aeneas’ cowards
Renege on their agreement? I’ll go face him.
Father, bring offerings, and set the terms.
I’ll send the Trojans (on the run from Asia)
To hell, before a Latin audience,
One sword refuting all our shame, or else
We’ll be his slaves, Lavinia his bride.”
Latinus answered, with his heart made quiet:
“Indomitable young man, your fierce courage
Must weigh against my heavy obligation
To take great care in looking to the future.
You have your father Daunus’ realm. You’ve captured
Many towns. I have gold and open hands.
Other unmarried girls, with proper bloodlines,
Live throughout Latium. Let me be straightforward.
I’ll use harsh words, but you must take them in.
My child was not for any former suitor:

. 318 .

5

10

15

20

25

B O O K 12
Divine and human prophets made this clear.
Our common blood, my love for you, the tears
Of my poor wife prevailed: I broke all bonds,
Seized my son’s new bride, started evil war.
Since then, you see what dogs me, and how great
Your hardships are, above all. Two huge battles
Are lost; this city scarcely lets us guard
Italy’s hopes. Our blood still warms the Tiber;
Our bones have turned these miles of grasslands white.
What madness keeps me changing and retreating?
If you were killed, I would adopt these allies.
Shouldn’t I end the conflict now and spare you?
Your own Rutulian kin—all Italy—
What will they say if (fate forbid!) I lure you
To death, because you’re chasing this alliance?
Think of war’s risks, think of your poor old father
Grieving far off in Ardea, his city.”
These words did nothing to allay his passion;
The treatment only made the sickness worse.
But when he could, he spoke, “Excellent father,
It would be kinder not to be concerned.
Just let me make my bargain: life for glory.
And yet the spears I throw are not so feeble.
The wounds that I inflict don’t fail to bleed.
He’ll have no goddess-­mother there to veil
His flight in female clouds and empty shadows.”
The queen burst into tears, in deadly panic,
And held her child’s fierce suitor in her arms.
“If you regard me and these tears at all,
Turnus (my only hope now, my one solace
28–­
Divine and human prophets
made this clear: See 7.58–80 and 96–101.

30

35

40

45

50

55

29–­
Our common blood: Amata is
Turnus’s aunt.

. 319 .

B O O K 12
In old age, since Latinus’ rule and honor,
And our whole tottering house, are on your shoulders),
Tell me you won’t fight hand to hand with Trojans.
I have a stake in how this combat ends.
Along with you, I’ll leave this hateful daylight,
No captive of my son-­in-­law Aeneas.”
Lavinia was there and heard her mother.
The tears came pouring down her flaming cheeks,
Dashing across the heat of crimson blushes.
Indian ivory purple dye has wounded,
Or roses bunched with lilies, lending shadows
Of red—these were the colors on the girl’s face.
He stared, confused by love—which stoked his passion
To fight—and spoke a few words to Amata:
“Mother, I plead with you, don’t let the omen
That sends me to the grisly clash of Mars
Be tears. I am not free to put off death.
Idmon, go now, displease the Phrygian tyrant
With these words: when tomorrow’s dawn first rises,
Blushing and driving her red chariot,
He must not lead his forces out: both armies
Can down their arms and let his blood or mine
End this. That’s how we’ll court Lavinia.”
He hurried back inside. Where were his horses?
He smiled to see their whinnying impatience.
Orithyia’s superb gifts to Pilumnus
Were swifter than the wind, whiter than snow.
Their drivers fussed around them busily,
Slapping their chests and combing their long manes.
Turnus strapped on a breastplate, gold with scales

72–­Mother: He thinks of her as his
mother-­in-­law.
75–­the Phrygian tyrant: Aeneas.

60

65

70

75

80

85

83–­Orithyia’s superb gifts to Pilum­
nus: Orithyia, wife of the North Wind,
Boreas, gave the horses to Pilumnus,
Turnus’s grandfather.

. 320 .

B O O K 12
Of pale bronze, set his shield for action, took up
His helmet with its red crests in their sockets,
And then—forged by the fire god for his father,
Daunus, and tempered in Styx’ stream—his sword.
On a huge column in the central hall
Leaned a strong spear, won from Auruncan Actor.
He seized and clenched it, shook and brandished it,
And cried, “My faithful servant, never shirking,
The time has come. Great Actor carried you,
And now it’s Turnus. Let me throw him down,
Rip off his corselet with my brawny hand
And smear dust over Phrygian eunuch hair,
Sodden with myrrh and crimped with iron tongs.”
His eyes flashed as these rages hounded him;
His face, on fire all over, threw off sparks:
As an enraged bull bellows fearsomely,
And tries to vent his fury with his horns—
Charging against a tree trunk, jabbing wind—
And kicks up sand in prelude to the battle.
Equally fierce, in armor from his mother,
Aeneas roused his soul to martial rage,
Glad of the offer that would end the conflict.
Now he assured his men and anxious Iulus
Of destiny, and sent to King Latinus
A firm reply that set the terms for peace.
The dawn’s first glow spread on the mountaintops
As the Sun’s chariot rose from the ocean,
His horses’ nostrils flaring, breathing light.
Beneath the splendid city’s walls, Rutulians
90–­the fire god: Vulcan, who also
forged Aeneas’ shield.
93–­Actor: Otherwise unknown.

90

95

100

105

110

115

99–­Phrygian eunuch hair: A typical
Roman insult toward Easterners, who
were considered effeminate.

. 321 .

B O O K 12
And Trojans measured out the fighting ground
And in the center piled up sod for altars
To common gods. Some men, in sacred garlands
And hooded by their cloaks, brought fire and water.
In massive columns, the Ausonian army
Poured from the gate. The Trojans and Etruscans
Streamed from their camp, with all their varied weapons,
As if grim Mars himself had summoned them.
The captains flew among them, flaunting gold
And purple gear: Assaracus’ descendant
Mnestheus was there, and brave Asilas;
Messapus too, Neptune’s horse-­taming offspring.
Each, at the signal, fell into his place,
Planted his spear and leaned his shield against it.
Eager to see, mothers, the unarmed commons,
And weak old men came pouring out to fill
Towers and roofs, or stood above high gateways.
Juno was watching from the Alban hilltop
(Not famous yet—it wasn’t even named).
She saw the field and both the armies, Trojan,
Laurentian, and the city of Latinus.
Now she addressed a fellow deity,
Sister of Turnus, who ruled sounding rivers
And lakes (the honor that the king of heaven
Granted because he’d raped the virgin girl).
“Cherished nymph, glory of the streams, you know
I favor you above all girls in Latium
Who’ve been with willful Jove and not enjoyed it.
131–­Eager to see: An example of the
narrative trope of teichoscopia, “viewing
from the walls,” such as in Iliad 3.
134–­
the Alban hilltop: The Alban
Mount, southeast of Rome, where there
will later be a temple of Jupiter.

120

125

130

135

140

139–­
Sister of Turnus: Juturna, a
water nymph, first mentioned at 10.439–
40.

. 322 .

B O O K 12
I’ve gladly let you have your place in heaven.
Learn of the grief in store, but don’t blame me.
With Fate and Fortune letting Latium prosper,
I shielded Turnus and your city’s walls.
But now I see the youth outmatched by fate.
An angry force draws near and brings his ending.
I cannot watch them make a pact or fight.
Would you dare help your brother at close quarters?
You should. Poor things, it still might turn out better.”
At once, Juturna’s face was streaming tears.
Repeatedly she struck her handsome breast.
“This is no time to cry,” said Saturn’s daughter.
“Run to your brother, save him, find a way,
Or stir up war and break the truce they’ve made.
I will support you.” But this goading speech
Left the girl still in doubt, confused and stricken.
Now the kings came. Latinus’ chariot
Was four-­horsed, massive; and around his temples
Shone twelve gold rays, the emblem of the Sun,
His ancestor, while Turnus brandished two spears
With broad heads as he drove his two white horses.
Aeneas, father of the Roman race,
His shield a star, his armor from divine hands,
Marched from his camp beside Ascanius,
Rome’s second hope. A priest in pure white robes
Brought out a piglet and an unshorn sheep
And made them stand before the flaming altar.
The leaders faced the rising sun. They sprinkled
Salted grain, notched the foreheads of the victims,
And poured out their libations on the altars.

169–­Rome’s second hope: That is,
after Aeneas.
173–­
Salted grain, . . . the fore­
heads of the victims: Salted grain was

145

150

155

160

165

170

sprinkled on the forehead of sacrificial
animals. The forelock was ritualistically
cut and the hair burned; see 6.245–46.

. 323 .

B O O K 12
Faithful Aeneas drew his sword and swore:
“I call the Sun to witness, and this land
For which I have endured so many hardships;
And the almighty father and his consort—
May she be kinder now, I pray—and great Mars,
Lord who twists every war beneath his power;
Rivers and springs, and everything we worship
In the sky’s heights and in the blue of ocean:
If Turnus the Italian wins, we losers
Must migrate to the city of Evander,
Iulus will cede this land, Aeneas’ people
Will not renew the war against this city.
If in this combat Victory sides with me
(I think it will; may the gods’ power confirm this),
I will not make the Trojans overlords
Or claim the throne. With neither race the loser,
We’ll make a lasting bond, on equal terms.
I’ll bring our rites and gods in. My wife’s father,
Latinus, can still reign and keep his army
While Trojans build my town, Lavinium.”
Aeneas had been first. Latinus followed,
His eyes on heaven, right hand to the stars.
“Aeneas, I too swear by earth, sea, stars,
Latona’s twins, and Janus with two faces,
The power of gods below, and cruel Dis’ temples.
Father, whose lightning bolt welds treaties, hear me:
I touch the altars; by the fire between us,
And by the gods, our race won’t break this treaty,
Whatever the result. No force will turn me
Aside from this, though seas may flood the land
In chaos, heaven melt its way to hell;
As surely as this scepter”—in his right hand—
“Won’t send out shoots with tender shading leaves
Now that it’s severed from its mother earth
And had its boughs and foliage stripped away—

. 324 .

175

180

185

190

195

200

205

B O O K 12
It was a tree; a craftsman now has wrapped it
In handsome bronze for Latin kings to carry.”
So they affirmed the terms before the nobles.
And now they cut the consecrated throats
Above the flame, pulled out the throbbing guts,
And piled the altars with the laden platters.
All along, the Rutulians thought the fight
Unfair, which stirred a welter of emotions,
Worse now that they could see themselves outmatched,
Worse still when Turnus silently stepped forward
With downcast eyes to pray before the altar,
His face so young, his youthful form so pale.
Juturna, Turnus’ sister, sensed the murmurs
Were growing, and the crowd confused and shaken.
She assumed Camers’ form (his ancestry
Was splendid, and his father known for courage,
And he himself the cutting edge of battle)
And sowed all sorts of rumors through the army—
She knew what she was doing—and harangued it:
“Rutulians, what’s this shameful sacrifice
Of one man? Aren’t we all a match for them?
Look at how few there are—Arcadians, Trojans,
And Tuscans, Turnus’ fated enemies.
Would half of us have one opponent each?
Turnus will have the same immortal glory
As gods themselves, to whom he’s vowed his life.
We’ll lose our native land, we’ll be enslaved,
Sitting here dawdling on the battlefield!”
The fire these words set in the soldiers’ hearts
Grew and grew. Mutters snaked across the ranks.
Latins, Laurentians changed, and even those
Who just before had hoped for peace and safety
Now longed for arms, prayed for the truce to break,
Wringing their hearts for Turnus’ unjust lot.
More forcefully, Juturna gave a sign

. 325 .

210

215

220

225

230

235

240

B O O K 12
In the sky’s heights, of just the character
To be misread and muddle the Italians:
Jove’s tawny eagle chased a shrieking mob
Of shore birds in the ruddy sky—a winged rout—
And then went swooping to the waves and captured
The leader of the swans in his cruel talons,
Transfixing the Italians. But the flock
Now rallied with a cry—amazing sight.
The sky was darkened by their cloud of wings
As they pursued their enemy. The eagle,
Harried and weighed down, let the plunder fall
Into the stream and fled among the clouds—
An omen the Rutulians loudly hailed,
Stirring to fight. Tolumnius the augur
Spoke first: “This is the thing I often prayed for,
The gods’ sign—welcome! Follow me to battle,
Poor people, terrorized by this invader,
Like weak birds, as he sacks your coasts—the outrage!
He’ll hoist his sails to get away, a long voyage.
With a united purpose, close your ranks
And fight to save the prince who’s taken from you.”
Now he ran forward toward the enemy,
Flinging a spear. The well-­aimed cornel shaft
Hissed through the air. A shout rose instantly
From every part of the excited crowd.
The spear flew toward the nine resplendent sons
A single virtuous Etruscan wife
Had given to Arcadian Gylippus.
It struck one in the waist (right at the pin
That held the chafing sword belt at the belly)—
A very handsome youth with shining armor—
258–­Tolumnius the augur: Augurs
observed signs, especially the flight of
birds, to interpret the will of the gods.

. 326 .

245

250

255

260

265

270

275

B O O K 12
Passed through his ribs and pitched him on the sand.
The brave line of his brothers, fired with grief,
Drew swords and took up spears, attacking blindly.
The ranks of the Laurentians dashed against them.
The answer was a flood of Agyllines,
Trojans, Arcadians in painted armor,
All with one passion: settling this with war.
They tore apart the altars—while a wild storm,
A ruthless rain of iron filled the sky—
And snatched the bowls and braziers. King Latinus
Fled with his routed gods. The truce was broken.
Men seized the reins of chariots, or vaulted
Onto their mounts and menaced with drawn swords.
Eager to spoil the truce, Messapus charged
Aulestes the Etruscan, who wore emblems
Of kingship. As the poor man backed away,
He hit an altar, which he tumbled over
Onto his head. Excitedly, Messapus
Galloped up with his spear. The king was pleading.
The rider loomed and struck and jeered. “He’s finished—
A better offering for the gods above.”
Italians ran to strip the still-­warm body.
From that same altar Corynaeus snatched
Lit wood, and as Ebysus lunged for him,
Thrust the flame in his face. His giant beard
Blazed with a stinging stench, and the attacker
Now grabbed his dazed opponent by the hair,
Forced him down, kneeling hard, and pierced his side
With the unyielding sword. The shepherd Alsus
Dashed through flung spears, but Podalirius
Pursued him with a sword; now his opponent
Lifted an ax in turn and split his brow
And chin, and spattered gore across his armor.
A sleep of iron pressed his eyelids down,
And left them closed for an eternal night.

. 327 .

280

285

290

295

300

305

310

B O O K 12
Righteous Aeneas stood bareheaded, lifting
An unarmed hand and shouting to his troops:
“Why are you racing to a brawl again?
Hold in your rage: we’ve ratified our terms,
So let me keep them—I must fight alone.
Don’t be afraid; my sword will seal this treaty.
These rites have pledged that Turnus is for me.”
The warrior was still haranguing loudly,
When a winged arrow hissed its way to him—
But which hand sent it flying is unknown.
Did chance or did a god bring the Rutulians
Such glory? This great exploit’s fame was stifled.
Nobody boasted that he’d shot Aeneas.
Hope flared up hot in Turnus when he saw
Aeneas falling back, his captains panicked.
He called for arms and horses, proudly vaulted
Into his chariot and grabbed the reins.
Many strong men died where he flew along.
Others he rolled away half-­dead, he trampled
Whole ranks, he poured their own spears on the routed.
As, by the chilly Hebrus, bloody Mars
Is stirred to clash his shield and storm to war,
Giving his team free rein to skim the plains
Faster than South and West Winds, and their hoofbeats
Make farthest Thrace groan, and the god’s retainers—
Treachery, Rage, and black Fear—pound beside him:
So wildly Turnus drove his steaming horses.
They capered on the pitiable carnage,
Spattering blood-­dew with their tearing hooves;
The sand they stamped across was mixed with gore.

319–­When a winged arrow hissed its
way to him: The wounding of Aeneas is
modeled on an episode in Iliad 4 in which
Menelaus is struck by an arrow.

. 328 .

331–­Hebrus: A river in Thrace.

315

320

325

330

335

340

B O O K 12
Hand to hand, he killed Thamyrus and Pholus,
Sthenelus with a distant shot—like Glaucus
And Lades, raised by Imbrasus, their father,
In Lycia and given matching armor
For sparring or out-­galloping the wind.
Elsewhere Eumedes plunged in. He possessed
His grandsire’s name, but Dolon’s strength and spirit:
His father, hero of the bygone war,
Had boldly named Achilles’ chariot
To be his prize for spying on the Greek camp.
But Diomedes gave a different prize,
Which kept him from aspiring to those horses.
Now Turnus saw the son far off, exposed,
Chased him the whole way with a javelin,
Then leapt out of his chariot to straddle
The fallen dying man. He stamped his neck down
And wrenched the shining sword from his right hand
To sink it in his throat, and taunted him:
“Trojan, here’s Western ground for you to conquer:
Measure it with your body, be rewarded
For daring to attack me. Look, your walls grow!”
His spear sent Asbytes with him, and Dares,
Chloreus, Sybaris, Thersilochus,
Thymoetes, whom his bucking horse had thrown.
Edonian north winds that howl across
The deep Aegean, driving winds to shore,
Gales that swoop down and drive the clouds from heaven
Were like the path that Turnus cut; the columns
And battle lines were turning in a flood.

348–49–­
his father . . . Achilles’
chariot: Dolon, a Trojan spy who was
killed in Iliad 10 by Diomedes and Odysseus.

345

350

355

360

365

359–­Western ground: A play on
Hesperia, “western land,” another name
for Italy.
365–­Edonian north winds: Thracian.
Thrace was known for harsh weather.

. 329 .

B O O K 12
His soaring plume was pulsing in the wind.
Phegeus, keen to stop his roaring onrush,
Dove straight into his way and yanked aside
The foam-­soaked bridles of his whipped-­up horses.
While he hung dragging from the yoke, his shield
Slipped, a spear struck him, and it penetrated
The breastplate with its double mesh and grazed him.
He faced his enemy still, heaved up his shield,
And tried to make some headway with his sword—
The hurtling whirling wheel propelled him headlong,
And he went sprawling. Turnus went to him.
The helmet left the neck exposed. He took
The head, and left the body in the sand.
These victories sowing death, Mnestheus
And staunch Achates, with Ascanius,
Helped back to camp Aeneas, smeared in gore,
His long spear propping every other step.
The arrow had snapped off. He gouged the wound,
Raging: the most direct way was a broadsword
To cut down where the point hid and allow him
To go back into battle. But the son
Of Iasus, Iapyx, came; Apollo
Had loved him painfully, beyond all others,
And gladly offered all his skills and powers:
His lyre and prophecy, and his swift arrows.
But to prolong his dying father’s life,
He chose to learn the properties of herbs
And humble, unheroic arts of healing.
Aeneas seethed in pain, propped on his huge spear
Among the warrior crowd with grieving Iulus,
But their tears didn’t move him. Old Iapyx,
His robe hitched up in the physicians’ manner,
Made many anxious trials with herbs of Phoebus—
Applied with no result, as when he prodded
The point or took it in his gripping forceps.

. 330 .

370

375

380

385

390

395

400

B O O K 12
No route proved lucky, and his patron god
Didn’t come help. Across the plain, cruel horror
Swelled, and disaster neared. Dust filled the sky,
Horsemen came swooping in, and swarms of arrows
Reached the camp’s heart. Grim shouts went heavenward,
As young men fought and died in ruthless battle.
Venus the mother, shaken by her child’s pain—
Unfair!—picked dittany in Cretan Ida.
This is an herb with trailing purple flowers
And downy leaves, familiar to wild goats
For browsing when they’re wounded by an arrow.
Venus, veiled in a dark cloud, brought it down
And steeped the secret remedy in water
A bright bowl held. She sprinkled in ambrosia
And panacea with its pleasant fragrance.
The moment old Iapyx bathed the wound,
The pain was gone, though he did not know why;
The blood dried from the bottom of the lesion;
The arrow yielded to his hand—unforced,
It dropped out, and the body’s weakness vanished.
Iapyx took the lead, goaded the others:
“Why are you standing there? Quick, get his weapons!
It was no human power, no skill of mine
That saved your life, Aeneas. Someone greater
Than me is sending you to greater exploits.”
Hungry to fight, he’d strapped on both gold greaves
Already. Restively, he shook his spear.
His shield now fitted to his side, his cuirass
Around his trunk, he gave Ascanius
A steel embrace and kissed him through the visor.

412–­dittany in Cretan Ida: A healing herb found only in Crete, dittany is
named for another Cretan mountain,
Dicte.

405

410

415

420

425

430

433–34–­he gave Ascanius a steel em­
brace: Contrasts with the tenderness
shown by Hector to his son in Iliad 6.

. 331 .

B O O K 12
“Learn courage and true toil from me, my boy—
And Fortune’s ways from others. I’ll protect you
This time, and lead you where the great rewards are.
Do keep in mind, as you mature, the models
From your own stock: be driven by Aeneas
Your father, and your uncle Hector too.”
He loomed, shook his huge spear, rushed from the gates;
With him, Antheus and Mnestheus
Took a massed force. The men poured out and emptied
The crowded camp, and soon the field was muddled
With blinding dust, jolted and roiled with tramping.
Turnus, up on the earthwork, saw them coming.
Blood chilled in the Italians as they saw.
Juturna was the first among the Latins
To recognize the sound, and she retreated.
Aeneas swept the deadly line with him
Across the plain. As storm clouds cross the sea
And block the sun (terror of wretched farmers,
Who, long before the start, foretell the downfall
Of trees, crops massacred, the whole land ruined),
While winds soar on and bring the sound to land:
So the Rhoeteian leader led his army
At his opponents, all formations joining
In one. Thymbraeus killed immense Osiris;
Mnestheus, Arcetius; Achates,
Epulo; Gyas, Ufens; then the augur
Tolumnius—who’d taken that first shot.
A shout rose skyward. Now it was Rutulians
In dust-­choked flight across the battlefield.
Aeneas didn’t stoop to bring them down
In death with duels on foot or with pursuit
Of men with spears. He kept at Turnus’ back
Through the murk, yelling challenges at Turnus.
456–­Rhoeteian: Trojan.

. 332 .

435

440

445

450

455

460

465

B O O K 12
The warrior girl Juturna, in alarm,
Toppled Metiscus, who was Turnus’ driver,
Over the shaft and left him far behind,
Taking his place to steer with rippling reins—
Disguised as him, down to his voice and weapons.
Like a black swallow flying through the mansion
Of a rich man, across his lofty halls,
Gathering scraps to bring her prattling brood,
Calling in empty porticoes and circling
The cisterns: so Juturna’s chariot
Sped through the hostile army. Everywhere
She made a show of her exultant brother—
But kept him far away from any fighting.
Aeneas tracked him on a winding path
Toward confrontation, calling through the remnants
Of battle lines. He’d glimpse his enemy
And fight to overtake the fleeing team:
Juturna always turned the chariot.
What should he do? As on chaotic currents,
His purposes were pulled conflicting ways.
Messapus happened to be carrying
Two pliant iron-­pointed spears. He ran up,
Aimed one and hurled it for a certain strike.
Behind his shield, Aeneas dropped to one knee,
But when the speeding spear passed over him,
It grazed the helmet, ripping off the plume.
His anger flared up at the sneak attack.
When he saw Turnus’ chariot receding,
He called on Jove, the broken truce’s altars,
And plunged straight in—and now Mars favored him.
He launched a slaughter—horrifying, cruel,
And random—and it gave his rage free rein.
What god will sing me such pain—deaths of all kinds
For chiefs whom Turnus and the Trojan hero
Drove back and forth in turn across the plain?

. 333 .

470

475

480

485

490

495

500

B O O K 12
Jupiter, was it your decree, this clash
Of nations that would later live as friends?
Where Trojans rushing in first met resistance
Aeneas killed Rutulian Sucro, deftly
Driving his cruel sword through the fence of ribs
Into his side—this wound that kills the fastest.
Turnus unhorsed Amycus and Diores,
Brothers, and then he dealt with them on foot,
One with a javelin, one with a sword,
And hung his chariot with their bleeding heads.
Aeneas in one clash slew brave Cethegus,
Talos and Tanaïs; then sad Onites,
Peridia’s child, a Theban; Turnus killed
Two brothers from Apollo’s Lycia:
Menoetes too, futile in hating war:
A poor Arcadian, adept at fishing
The teeming streams at Lerna—not at serving
Powerful men. His father sowed hired ground.
A fire is launched into a withered forest
From either side, to set the bay trees crackling;
Two frothy rivers crash from mountain heights
And hurry to the seas, each ravaging
Its path: so Turnus and Aeneas swept
The battlefield with so much energy.
Their rage swelled as it never had; their hearts burst,
Unconquered. They attacked with all their strength.
Murranus boasted of his ancient clan
And claimed a pure descent from Latin kings.
Aeneas’ whirling giant boulder dashed him
Onto the ground. The wheels rolled him ahead
Under the reins and yoke. Battering hooves
Trampled the man—his horses didn’t know him.
Hyllus charged in untrammeled fury; Turnus
Answered him with a spear to his gold helmet.
It pierced the forehead, lodging in his brain.

. 334 .

505

510

515

520

525

530

535

B O O K 12
Cretheus, bravest of the Greeks, was no match
For Turnus. When Aeneas came, Cupencus
Could find no safety in his gods. The poor man
Gained just a short delay from his bronze shield.
Laurentian fields saw your death, Aeolus:
Stretched on your back, you covered no small space,
Though the Greek phalanx couldn’t bring you down—
Achilles either, ending Priam’s reign.
Your walls were at Lyrnesus, under Ida:
Your finish line was here, your tomb this ground.
All the lines turned to fight now—Latins, Trojans:
Mnestheus, keen Serestus, and Messapus
(Tamer of horses), brave Asilas, Tuscans
Drawn up, Arcadian horsemen of Evander—
Each struggling on his own, with all his strength;
No rest, no pause in the prodigious fight.
Aeneas’ lovely mother prompted him
To make a quick deployment to the walls
And stun the Latins with a new disaster.
While tracking Turnus through the hostile lines,
And looking all around, he saw the city
Peaceful—untouched by all the strife. A vision
Of fuller battle jolted him. He called
Mnestheus, Sergestus, brave Serestus,
His captains, climbed a mound, and made a speech.
His army hurried in to crowd around him,
And listened with their shields and spears still hoisted:
“Obey, and don’t waste time. Jove’s on our side.
It’s a quick change of plans, but don’t hang back.
Unless the guilty town Latinus rules
Accepts our terms and comes beneath our yoke,
542–­Aeolus: A Trojan warrior, not to
be confused with the keeper of the winds
(see 1.52–63).

540

545

550

555

560

565

546–­Lyrnesus, under Ida: Lyrnesus
was a city near Troy, below Mount Ida.

. 335 .

B O O K 12
I’ll raze its smoking rooftops to the ground—
Unless I ought to wait till Turnus chooses
To fight with me and lose a second time.
Trojans, this evil war is his creation.
Bring torches, quick! Let flames enforce our treaty.”
Now all his forces raced to the attack
And in a massive wedge made for the walls.
Ladders and fire suddenly appeared.
Men scattered to the gates and cut the guards down,
Or made the sky dark with their hurtling weapons.
Aeneas at the front, below the ramparts,
Shouted, stretched out his hand, accused Latinus,
And called the gods to witness: he was forced
To war again—a second pact was broken.
The frightened people of the town were wrangling:
Some called to have the gates flung open, Trojans
Let in, the king dragged to the ramparts. Others
Brought arms, put up a fight—as when a shepherd
Tracks home a swarm of bees back to their cliff,
And fills their pumice crannies with sharp smoke,
Making them roil around in their wax quarters,
In terror and loud-­buzzing, sharpened rage;
A black reek billows through their home; inside,
It’s whirring shrilly as the smoke pours out.
A new blow to the tortured Latins shook
The city to the ground with grief. The queen
Looked from her rooms at the encroach, the walls
Attacked, the fire flying to the rooftops—
No Turnus, no Rutulian counterforce.
The wretched woman thought the youth had died,
And maddened by the sudden agony,
569–­I’ll raze its smoking rooftops
to the ground: As the Greeks did Troy’s.
See too Aeneas’s threat at 12.762.

570

575

580

585

590

595

582–­a second pact was broken: The
Fury Allecto had caused the first rupture
at 7.341–55.

. 336 .

B O O K 12
She cried she was to blame for these disasters,
And babbled in the frenzy of her grief.
Prepared to die, she ripped her purple robe
And hung a cruel noose from a lofty beam.
News of this great loss reached the Latin women.
Lavinia tore her bud-­bright hair and scratched
Her cheeks, while those around her raved with horror.
The sound of mourning echoed in the palace.
The tragic story traveled through the city,
Spreading despair. Latinus’ clothes were torn,
His white hair smeared with dust. The suicide
And the town’s downfall stunned him. He kept blaming
Himself: he hadn’t readily accepted
Trojan Aeneas as his son-­in-­law.
The warrior Turnus, at the field’s far side,
Was chasing a few stragglers, slowing down,
His pleasure in his horses’ onslaughts fading,
When the wind carried him the sound of shouting,
Signal of some new horror. The grim roar
Of the town’s turmoil fell on his keen ears.
“What is this monstrous loss that shakes the walls?
Why is this uproar flooding from the city?”
He pulled his reins and stopped, dazed with alarm.
His sister, though—she steered the chariot,
Looking just like Metiscus, Turnus’ driver—
Came back with this: “Let’s chase the sons of Troy here.
We’ve started winning, and the road lies open.
Others can shield their homes, but while Aeneas
Is pressuring Italians, let’s hurl death
At Trojans in their turn; you’ll leave this place

605–­bud-­bright hair: The Williams
text contains the rare word floros as opposed to the banal flavos (blond) to describe Lavinia’s hair.

600

605

610

615

620

625

612–13–­These lines are thought to be
spurious.

. 337 .

B O O K 12
With no less honor, and no fewer killed.”
Turnus replied:
“Sister, I knew you ever since you ruined
The truce, and threw yourself into the war.
Why bother now to hide your holy presence?
Who sent you from Olympus on this mission—
To see your hapless brother’s brutal death?
What can I do? What stroke of luck could save me?
Murranus died—I saw, he called to me;
No one still living is a dearer friend:
A massive wound brought down his massive body.
Poor Ufens fell, so didn’t see my shame.
The Trojans have his weapons and his corpse.
Should I give up and let them raze the town,
And not put Drances’ insults to the sword?
And will this country see me run away?
Is death so terrible? Spirits below,
Bless me! The gods above have turned away.
My soul descends untouched by cowardice.
I’m worthy of my splendid ancestors.”
A horse came dashing, foaming at the mouth,
Through ranks of enemies and brought him Saces,
Wounded across the face, entreating Turnus:
“Have mercy on your people—you’re our last hope.
Aeneas, in the thunder of his onslaught,
Brings ruin to the towers of Italy.
Torches fly to the roofs already. Latium
Now looks to you. The king himself, Latinus,
Doesn’t know who his son is, or what treaty
Binds him; your queen, your staunch friend, killed herself,
Fled the light, terrified. Before the gate,
Only Messapus and the fierce Atinas
Hold our line—though around them stand close ranks
With swords that bristle like an iron wheat field—
And here you drive around on empty grass.”

. 338 .

630

635

640

645

650

655

660

B O O K 12
Turnus was stunned to hear of these reversals.
He stood and stared in silence. In one heart
Surged endless shame, madness infused with grief,
Love spurred by fury, and the pride of courage.
Clouds scattered from his mind, though, and that moment
He turned his burning wide eyes toward the walls,
Glared at the city from his chariot.
The flames were rolling up through every story,
A skyward stretch of waves that seized the tower—
Which he himself had raised, a compact network
Of beams, with wheels beneath, and lofty gangways.
“Sister, now fate has won. Don’t hold me back.
Let’s go where god and brutal Fortune call us:
I am resolved to fight Aeneas, suffer
Anything, die. You’ll see no more dishonor
In me. Grant me my final frenzy now.”
He vaulted from the chariot and burst
Straight through the hostile ranks and clouds of spears
At a dead run, deserting his sad sister,
Like a rock plunging from a mountaintop,
Torn free by wind, or by a scouring rainstorm,
Or loosening and undermining years;
Headlong, unstoppable, it speeds along,
Bouncing, and rolling with it trees and herds
And men. So through the scattered forces Turnus
Rushed to the city walls, where blood had drenched
The earth deep down, and spears sang through the air.
He waved his arm, protesting, bellowing:
“Rutulians, stop! Put down your weapons, Latins!
Whatever fortune brings is mine. I’ll pay
For the spoiled truce and settle this—it’s fairer.”
They all stepped back and made a space between them.
Father Aeneas heard the name of Turnus
And left the ramparts, left the city’s towers,
Broke off all action, threw off all delay

. 339 .

665

670

675

680

685

690

695

B O O K 12
In joy, and clashed his arms with mighty noise,
Towering like a mountain—Athos, Eryx,
Or Father Apennine, who relishes
Rattling his oaks and rearing his white head.
Rutulians, Latins, Trojans all together,
Those on the high walls, those below who worked
Battering rams, turned avidly to look,
Laying down arms. Even Latinus gaped
As the two giant heroes came together
To fight it out—though born a world apart.
Once on the open ground, they started forward,
Running, and launched their spears across the distance,
Then plunged in hand to hand, their bronze shields ringing.
The earth groaned. Now their swords struck, and the blows
Multiplied, in the thick of chance and courage.
As on Taburnus’ heights or Sila’s vast slopes,
Two bulls meet in a savage clash of horns;
The herdsmen back away from them, the herd
Stands mute in fear, the heifers wonder which
Will rule the woods—which will the herds all follow?
Brutally, they converge, exchanging wounds,
Straining their horns home; down their necks and shoulders
Blood washes, groans re-­echo through the glade:
Trojan Aeneas met the Daunian hero
With that much force. The clang of shields filled heaven.
Now Jove himself held up a pair of scales,
Evenly balanced, for the pair of fates:
701–2–­Athos, Eryx, or Father Apen­
nine: Athos was in northern Greece, Eryx
on Sicily. The Apennines are a mountain
range that runs the length of Italy.
715–­Taburnus’ heights or Sila’s vast
slopes: Mount Taburnus, now Monte
Taburo, is part of the Apennines in
southern Italy. Sila was a forested region

700

705

710

715

720

725

in southern Italy inhabited by the Samnites, Rome’s great Italian foe.
725–­a pair of scales: Jupiter balances
the fates of Aeneas and Turnus as he did
those of Achilles and Hector in Iliad 22,
with the difference that Vergil feels no
need to spell out the result.

. 340 .

B O O K 12
Who was condemned? Which side would death weigh down?
Seeing a safe chance, Turnus darted forward,
Lifted his sword, and struck with all his strength.
Trojans and frightened Latins shouted. Both lines
Juddered—and then the treacherous sword broke,
Deserting its fierce master as it landed.
He saw the strange bare hilt. He was unarmed,
And ran—he had to—faster than the East Wind.
Mounting behind his team, they say, and bolting
To battle, he had snatched his charioteer
Metiscus’ sword, and left behind his father’s.
This served him well in scattering the Trojans,
But when it fell on Vulcan’s holy weapons,
The mortal blade, brittle as ice, was shattered.
Its pieces glittered on the tawny sand.
Turnus sought frantically for some way out
Across the plain, and wove erratic circles,
Since Trojans pressed around him, and a swamp
Blocked one side, and the looming walls the other.
Aeneas kept up, though the arrow wound
Hampered and slowed him. Seething, step by step,
He harried, right behind his cowed opponent—
Just as a hunting dog keeps baying, charging
A stag trapped by a river or a fence
That’s hung with terrifying scarlet feathers;
Panicking at the ambush and the high bank,
The prey runs back and forth in countless dodges;
The zestful Umbrian hound with gaping jaws
Has got him—almost—now—but snaps on air.
Then a real outcry rose, the pools around them

737–­his father’s: Turnus has left behind the sword forged by Vulcan for his
father, Daunus (12.90–91).

730

735

740

745

750

755

751–­with terrifying scarlet feathers:
Devices used by Roman hunters to drive
prey along a predetermined path into
nets.

. 341 .

B O O K 12
Echoed, the whole sky thundered with the uproar:
On the run, Turnus screamed at the Rutulians—
Each one by name, and shouted for his own sword.
Aeneas threatened instant death for any
Who came near, and to terrify them more,
He vowed he’d raze their town. He hobbled on,
Chased Turnus clear around five times, and five
The other way. It was no sport; no small prize
Was now at stake, but Turnus’ life and blood.
An olive tree, with bitter leaves, had stood there,
Sacred to Faunus. Sailors saved from shipwrecks
Revered it: pledges for Laurentum’s god
Were put there, nailed-­up gifts and hanging clothes.
The Trojans cut it down—though it was holy—
With other trees, to clear a space to fight on.
The heir of Dardanus, Aeneas, hurled
A spear into the stump. It stuck there, anchored
In the tough root. He stooped to wrench it free:
The weapon might outrun the man he couldn’t.
A raving terror now took hold of Turnus:
“Faunus, and queenly Earth, I beg for pity.
Hold the spear, if I’m faithful to the rites
Aeneas’ mob, by making war, has spoiled.”
This was his prayer, which didn’t go to waste.
Aeneas struggled at the clinging stump,
But all his strength could not suffice to loosen
Its hardwood jaws; and while he kept on straining,
The Daunian goddess—in Metiscus’ form—
Rushed up and gave her brother back his sword.
Venus, in rage—why was the nymph allowed this?—
Came near and tore the spear out. Both men, hulking,
Courage and arms recovered now—one holding
767–­Faunus: An Italian god of woods
and trees.

760

765

770

775

780

785

784–­The Daunian goddess: Juturna,
called Daunian after her father, Daunus.

. 342 .

B O O K 12
His trusted sword, one looming, spear in hand—
Took panting stands as Mars’ competitors.
All-­powerful Olympus’ king addressed
Juno, who watched them from a tawny cloud:
“My wife, what’s left to do? Isn’t it over?
You do admit that fate must raise Aeneas
Up to the stars, a god of Italy.
What hopes can keep you in these chilly clouds?
How could a mortal weapon strike a god?
What of the sword Juturna (you control her!)
Returned to Turnus, new strength for the beaten?
Give way at last, I beg you. Don’t let sorrow
Gnaw you in silence—and I want an end
To brooding grievances from your dear mouth.
It’s time now. You were free to hound the Trojans
On land and sea, ignite this evil war,
Destroy a house, bring mourning to a wedding.
I won’t allow you more.” The child of Saturn,
The goddess, answered, with her head bent humbly:
“Father Jove, god of power, I knew your will,
And left the earth and Turnus—otherwise,
You wouldn’t see me here, meek and accepting.
I’d be there, ringed with flames, down on the front lines,
Dragging the Trojans to the bitter fight.
I urged Juturna, yes, to help her brother—
Poor man—and sanctioned bolder acts to save him,
But never meant for her to draw her bow:
By the relentless spring of Styx, I swear it,
The only oath that awes the gods in heaven.
But I concede and leave the fights I loathe,
Begging one thing for Latium, for your children’s
Glorious state—no law of fate forbids it.
When they make peace with a propitious marriage—
Let them!—and treaties and shared laws unite them,
Don’t make the native Latin warriors change

. 343 .

790

795

800

805

810

815

820

B O O K 12
Their ancient ways and name; don’t force on them
The clothes and speech of Troy. Let Latium be,
And grant it centuries of Alban kings,
And Roman stock, strong with Italian courage.
Troy fell. Now let her name lie fallen with her.”
The world’s and humankind’s creator smiled.
“Truly, you’re Saturn’s child too, my own sister:
You hold such waves of anger in your heart.
What good, though, has it done you? So be calm:
I grant your wish, you’ve won, I give up gladly.
Ausonians will keep their speech and customs
And name unchanged. The Trojans will fade out
As they breed in. I’ll introduce their rites,
But make one Latin people, with one language.
You’ll see the new race, with Italian blood,
Surpass the world—and gods—in piety.
Nobody else will bring you greater worship.”
Juno agreed and changed her mind, contented,
And at that moment left the cloud in heaven.
Now the gods’ father had a plan in mind
To force Juturna from her brother’s side.
The twin fiends named for horror are the Dirae.
The Dead of Night gave birth to them, together
With deepest hell’s Megaera. She wound all three
With coiling snakes and gave them windy wings.
They serve before the throne of ruthless Jove
As goads of terror for poor humankind
When the god’s ruler causes deadly plagues
Or menaces a guilty town with war.
826–­Alban kings: The Alban kings,
descended from Aeneas through Ascanius, ruled this area between the events
of the Aeneid and Romulus’ founding of
Rome.
839–­piety: Aeneas’ primary virtue,

825

830

835

840

845

850

subservience of self to family, gods, and
country.
845–­Dirae: The “Grim Ones,” the
Furies Allecto and Tisiphone: see 6.555–
56 and 7.323–25. The third Fury is Me‑
gaera.

. 344 .

B O O K 12
One of this pair of ghouls was sent by Jove
From heaven to Juturna as an omen.
Fast as a whirlwind she flew down to earth,
Arrowlike, as if some Cydonian
Or Parthian bow had sent her hurtling, poisoned
With savage gall that has no remedy,
Whirring through clouds, unnoticed in the shadows.
So Night’s child made her swift way to the world.
Seeing the Trojan lines and Turnus’ columns,
Quickly she shrank to look like that small bird
That perches on deserted roofs, or tombs,
And sings—an evil omen—in the dark night.
The demon screeched and harried back and forth
In Turnus’ face, wings beating on his shield.
A strange, numb panic made his body helpless.
His hair stood up; his voice clung in his throat.
Juturna, his poor sister, knew the far hiss
Of the fiend’s wings; she tore her loosened hair,
Scratched her face bloody, pounded her breasts livid.
“Turnus, my brother, how can I help now?
What else must I endure? I have no skill
To keep you living. Can I fight this omen?
At last I’ll leave the field. No need to threaten,
Hideous birds. I know your deadly wingbeats;
I know the will of Jupiter, high-­minded,
High-­handed. But can this be how he pays
For my virginity? He made me deathless,
And yet if I could die, I’d end my anguish
And go with my poor brother through the shadows.
What is the good of my unending life

856–57–­Cydonian or Parthian bow:
Cydonians, or Cretans, were known
to poison their arrows. Parthians were
skilled archers.

855

860

865

870

875

880

862–­that small bird: Perhaps some
species of owl; an ill omen.

. 345 .

B O O K 12
Without you? Can the earth gape wide enough
To drop me to the shades, though I’m immortal?”
With many sighs, the goddess draped her head
In a gray veil and plunged into the river.
Aeneas pushed ahead and shook his spear—
Big as a tree—and spoke from his fierce heart:
“What’s the delay now, Turnus? Why fall back?
It’s not a race, but combat, hand to hand.
Change into every form. See what your courage
Or skill can do. Soar up into the sky,
Or find a hole down underground to hide in.”
But Turnus shook his head. “I’m not afraid
Of your words when the gods—and Jove—attack me.”
He looked around: by chance, a massive boulder,
An ancient bulk, was lying on the plain,
A marker to solve conflicts over fields.
Ten chosen men could scarcely shoulder it—
Men of the strength that earth brings forth today.
The hero grappled, grasped it, made a run
And rose and heaved it whirling at his rival.
But the familiar speed was not in Turnus,
Or strength to lift and throw that giant stone.
His knees gave way, his blood was frozen hard.
The stone went rolling through the empty air,
But not so far that it could strike its target.
As, when at night our eyes are sealed with slumber,
We dream we can’t run on by any effort,
And finally sink exhausted as we struggle;
The tongue is powerless, the body loses
The strength it knew, the voice and words are gone;
899–900–­Vergil reworks from Iliad
12 (445 ff.) the motif of the superiority
of Hector’s strength to that of modern-­

885

890

895

900

905

910

day men and from Lucretius’ De Rerum
Natura 5 (820 ff.) the idea of the earth’s
offspring becoming progressively punier.

. 346 .

B O O K 12
So the grim goddess blocked off every path
For Turnus’ valor. Baffled and distracted,
He gazed at the Rutulians and the city—
And froze in dread: his death was coming close.
Where could he—run—attack? His chariot—
Where? And his sister, who’d been driving it?
He paused. Aeneas shook the fatal spear,
Saw what chance offered, flung across the distance
With all his strength. No catapulted stones
Smash against walls like this. No thunderbolts
Strike with such noise. Strong as a hurricane,
Through the shield’s seven layers, bringing death,
Then through the breastplate’s lower edge it hissed,
And then into his thigh. And at the impact
Huge Turnus toppled forward on one knee.
The hills threw back the groans, the groves reechoed
The sounds Rutulians—on their feet now—made.
The humbled man looked up and stretched a hand out:
“I’ve earned this—I won’t grovel for my life.
Use your good luck. But if a parent’s anguish
(Think of Anchises) can at all concern you,
Then pity Daunus—please—in his old age.
Send me, or else my corpse, back to my family.
You’ve triumphed: the Italians see me begging
Mercy. Lavinia is now your wife.
Lay down your hatred.” There Aeneas stood,
Fierce, armed—but now his eyes had grown unsteady,
His hand still; and his halting change of heart
Grew stronger. Then he saw, on that tall body,
The belt with shining studs his young friend Pallas
Had once worn. Turnus, who had cut him down,
913–­the grim goddess: The Dira sent
by Jupiter.

. 347 .

915

920

925

930

935

940

B O O K 12
Displayed the hateful token on his shoulder.
Aeneas stared—the spoils brought back to him
His wild grief, and he burned with brutal rage.
“So you’ll escape, in loot from one of mine?
It’s Pallas who now slaughters you, to offer
Your vicious blood in payment for your crime.”
Incensed, he thrust the sword through Turnus’ chest.
The body’s warmth and strength dissolved; the life
Groaned in its rancor and fled down to Hades.