He spoke in tears, and gave the fleet free rein.
At length they landed at Euboean Cumae.
Their anchors, biting in, secured the ships
Prows seaward, while the curved sterns hemmed the beach.
A band of young men leaped out eagerly
On the Hesperian shore. Some searched for seeds
Of flame in veins of flint, some sacked the dense woods,
Home of wild beasts, and brought reports of rivers.
Steadfast Aeneas sought Apollo’s stronghold
And the huge cave behind it on that height.
There Delos’ prophet breathed into the Sibyl
His mighty will, to show the things to come.
Hecate’s grove, her gold house, arched above them.
Daedalus, in the story, fled King Minos,
Venturing to the sky on speedy wings.
By a new route, he swam into the cold North,
And hung at last above the heights at Cumae.
This land first took him in. He offered Phoebus
His wings—like oars—and then a giant temple,
Androgeus’ death carved on the door, with Athens
Paying—how pitiful—her yearly fine,
Seven sons’ lives. The urn is there, the lots drawn.
Behind the scene, Crete looms above the sea:
Brutal lust for the bull; Pasiphaë,
His mate by stealth; their human-­bovine offspring,
The Minotaur, crazed passion’s monument;
The hopeless, wearying maze beneath the palace.
But pitying the deep love of the princess,
Daedalus solved his own entrapping riddle:
A thread would guide the lost. You, Icarus,
But for your father’s grief, would figure large
In that great artwork. Twice his hands failed, trying
To show your fall in gold. Now, with Achates
Gone in, the Trojans would have scanned each image;
He soon returned, though, with Deïphobe,
Glaucus’ child, Phoebus and Diana’s priestess,
Who told the king, “This is no time for gawking.
Come, offer seven heifers from a wild herd,
And seven ewes as well, correctly chosen.”
The Trojans quickly carried out her orders.
She called them in then, to the soaring temple.
A cave cuts deeply through the cliff at Cumae.
A hundred mouths, a hundred apertures
Disgorge the swarming answers of the Sibyl.
“It’s time,” the virgin shouted at the threshold,
“To ask what fate will bring you! Look, the god!”
Just as she spoke before the doors, her color
Changed, face contorted, hair blew wild, she panted.
Her heart was frenzied, and she seemed to tower
And echo the god’s voice, since he was near,
“Trojan Aeneas, are your prayers and vows
So feeble? Only words of thunder stun
These great gates open.” Silence—as a chill
And tremor skittered through the Trojans’ hard bones.
From deep within his heart, their leader pleaded,
“Phoebus, you always pitied Trojan anguish.
You guided Paris’ hand and arrow, piercing
The son of Aeacus, and you have led me
On a bold voyage between the continents,
Clear to Massylian land, along the Syrtes.
At last we clutch elusive Italy.
Troy’s fortunes must not dog us any farther.
All of you, gods and goddesses, who balked
At Ilium, the splendor of our reign,
Can spare us now, at heaven’s will; and you,
Most holy seer, since I only seek
The realm fate owes me, let the Trojans settle
In Latium with their wandering harried gods.
I will decree a marble shrine for Phoebus
And for Diana of the Crossroads. Feast days
Will have Apollo’s name. For you, my kind guide,
I’ll raise a great shrine in my land and put there
Your lots and secret forecasts for my people,
And appoint priests. But do not trust your verses
To leaves that gusts can play with and confuse.
Chant them yourself, please.” There he finished speaking.
Inside, the priestess ran amok, resisting
Phoebus and trying hard to shake that great god
Out of her soul. He drove her harder, twisted
Her face and curbed her heart, pinioning, shaping.
The hundred huge doors, on their own, broke open
And poured outside the answers of the prophet:
“Your perils on the seas are finally over,
Though worse will come on land. But be assured:
The Trojans will arrive. Lavinium’s land, though,
Will make them wish they hadn’t. I see war,
Grisly war, and the Tiber frothing blood.
You’ll have another Simoïs and Xanthus,
A Greek camp, and a Latin-­born Achilles,
Himself a goddess’ son. Juno will cling
To hounding you, while on your knees you plead
With every town and tribe in Italy.
Again a foreign love, an alien marriage
Will bring the Teucrians ruin.
Do not give in, but where your fortune lets you,
Go on more bravely still. The path to safety—
Yes, it is true—will open through a Greek town.”
The Sibyl in her shrine at Cumae chanted.
Her fearsome, truth-­entangling riddles boomed
Out of the cave. Apollo lashed his reins
Against her, drove his goads into her heart.
But then her frenzy lulled, her rabid mouth
Grew quiet, and the hero spoke. “Pure virgin!
No unfamiliar form of hardship threatens:
My soul has grasped and probed all this. But grant
One thing. The king below and Acheron’s
Welling dark swamp, they say, are through this doorway.
Let me come see my father, face to face.
Tell me the way, open the holy gates.
From fire and a thousand hostile spears,
From the enemies’ midst I saved him, on these shoulders.
He was my comrade over all the seas,
Enduring every threat of sky and ocean;
His weak old age deserved another fate.
He begged me, trusted me to come implore you
Here at your door. Pity the son, the father.
Your kindness has this power: Hecate
Put in your charge the forest of Avernus.
If Orpheus, with sweet notes on a lyre
From Thrace, could call his wife back, and if Pollux
Could buy his brother’s life, and they exchange
The journey back and forth—and Hercules?
Great Theseus? I’m kindred, too, of Jove
On high.” So he implored, and clutched the altar.
The seer began: “Sowed from the gods’ blood, Trojan
Anchises’ son! The road down to Avernus
Is easy. Black Dis’ door gapes night and day.
The toil, the struggle is to walk back up
Into the open air. A few could: godborn;
Those Jove loved justly; those whose burning valor
Raised them to heaven. Forests fill the center;
Cocytus flows in black curves all around.
If you’re in love with floating twice on pools
Of Styx, and hot to see black Tartarus
Twice, if your whim is plunging in this mad task,
Hear what to do first. In dense foliage hides
A pliant gold-­leafed branch that’s dedicated
To Juno of the Underworld. The whole woods,
The dim and shady valley shelter it.
Whoever comes within earth’s hidden places
Must first pluck off the tree its gold-­haired offspring.
Lovely Proserpina appointed this
Her offering. Another will replace it,
And other leaves of gold grow from its stem.
Search for it high up; when you’ve duly found it,
Pluck it. It should fall gladly in your hand
If fate has summoned you. If not, your whole strength
Will fail—you couldn’t tear it off with hard steel.
But—you don’t know—a friend lies dead, defiling
The whole fleet with his corpse, while in my doorway
You dawdle, asking for my prophecies.
First lay him in a tomb, his proper home,
And kill black sheep, the first appeasing rite;
Then only will you see the Stygian groves,
The land that’s closed to life.” Her lips shut, silent.
Aeneas, grim-­faced, eyes fixed on the ground,
Walked from the cave and in his mind turned over
What the descent might bring. Faithful Achates,
In stride with him, shared his anxieties.
They spoke in trust and spent a long time guessing
Which man had died, and waited to be buried.
But when they reached the arid shore again,
They saw Misenus dead—he hadn’t earned it.
No one was better skilled than Aeolus’ son
At kindling valor with a bronze horn’s song.
He’d gone to battle in great Hector’s cohort.
You knew him by his trumpet and his spear.
But when Achilles won, and Hector’s life
Became his plunder, brave Misenus followed
Aeneas, just as great a Trojan leader.
Yet then, the fool, he blared a hollow conch shell
Over the sea and challenged gods at music.
Triton, who envied him—or that’s the story—
Caught him among foam-­pouring rocks and drowned him.
So howls of mourning rang from all his comrades,
Especially good Aeneas. Then they hurried,
In tears, to raise the altar of a tomb,
Heaping wood skyward, as the Sibyl ordered.
They strode into the old woods, deep beast shelter.
Pines toppled, holm oaks echoed to the ax.
Wedges split beams of ash and fissile oak,
And giant mountain ash rolled down the slope.
Aeneas, with the same tools as the others,
Set an example, urged the workers on.
Scanning the vast woods, pondering his tasks
In his sad heart, he happened to be pleading:
“What if that gold branch were revealed to me
In this huge woods, since everything is true
The seer said of you, Misenus—too true.”
He’d scarcely finished when two doves came flying
Out of the sky to pass before his eyes,
And landed on the grass. The matchless hero,
Knowing his mother’s birds, now prayed with joy:
“Guide me, if there’s a way; direct your flight
Into the grove where that rich bough is shading
The fertile ground. And you, immortal mother,
Be with me in this trial.” He checked his steps
To see what signs the birds gave, where they flew.
Browsing, they fluttered just the length ahead
That kept them in the sight of their pursuer.
But when they reached Avernus’ reeking throat,
They shot up, then soared down through limpid air,
Then perched on what Aeneas sought, the contrast
Of flashing gold among the tree’s green branches;
Just as the mistletoe in dead of winter
Grows a fresh leaf, its own and not its host’s,
And rings the smooth trunk with its yellow shoot,
So the gold leaves stood out against the dark oak.
Their foil was jangling in the gentle wind.
He grasped the clinging branch, wrenched it off keenly,
And took it to the prophet Sibyl’s home.
Back on the beach, the Trojans still were weeping
In last rites for Misenus’ thankless ashes.
They built a massive pyre first, fueled with pitch pine
And oak logs. On the sides they wove dark leaves,
Set funeral cypresses in front, on top
The splendid beauty of his flashing armor.
Some heated pots to make the water swell,
And washed the cold corpse and anointed it.
A groan rose. Now they laid out what they wept for,
Beneath its own familiar purple cloak.
Now some took on that sad task, shouldering
The giant bier, and, in the ancient rite,
Applied the torch. Heaped gifts of food and incense
And bowls of olive oil were burned together.
After the flame died and the ash collapsed,
Wine washed the thirsty cinders. Corynaeus
Gathered the bones and laid them in a bronze jar.
Three times he walked around his comrades, sprinkling
A clear dew from a fertile olive branch
To cleanse them, speaking last words. On the ashes
Reverent Aeneas raised a massive mound,
And placed the hero’s horn and armor there
Beneath a lofty mountain called Misenus
To keep his name alive throughout the ages.
With haste, he now performed the Sibyl’s orders.
There was a cave—monstrously gaping, jagged,
Deep. A dark woods, a black lake sheltered it.
Birds at their peril made their winging way
Above, in poison breathing from that black throat
And pouring upward to the dome of heaven.
The Birdless Place is what the Greeks have named it.
First the priest had four young black bullocks brought
To stand there. He poured wine between their horns
And clipped the bristling tufts that stood up highest,
As the first offering for the sacred fire,
And called on Hecate, strong in hell and heaven.
Others applied their knives and caught the warm blood
In bowls. Aeneas slaughtered with his sword
A black-­fleeced lamb for Night, the Furies’ mother,
And Earth, their sister; for Proserpina
A sterile cow; then sacrificed entire bulls
In the night rituals of the Stygian king,
Pouring a rich oil on the burning entrails.
Now, right before the rising sun’s light broke,
The ground beneath their feet roared. Wooded slopes
Shifted. Dogs seemed to howl among the shadows.
The goddess! “Keep away!” the priestess yelled.
“Far away! Leave the grove unless you’re pure!”
But you go forward boldly. Pull your sword free.
It’s now you need your fearless heart, Aeneas.”
Into the open cave she bolted, maddened,
And he kept pace with her, his guide, with brave steps.
You gods who rule dead souls, you silent shades,
And Phlegethon and Chaos, spread with still night,
Give holy sanction, let me pass this tale on
And open what deep earth and darkness cover.
They walked along, in dark and lonely night,
Through empty shadows and the court of Dis,
As by a stingy moon’s cloud-­crowded glimmer,
A path leads through the woods when Jove has shadowed
The sky, and color hides beneath black night.
Before the entrance hall, the mouth of Orcus,
Sorrow and stinging Guilt have made their beds.
Here are pale Sickness, bleak Old Age, and Fear,
Crime-­urging Hunger, shameful Poverty—
Horrible sights—and Drudgery and Death:
Death’s brother, Sleep, as well; ebullient Evil,
And War, the slaughterer, on the threshold, near
The Furies’ iron rooms; crazed Discord lives there,
Her hair of snakes tied up with bloodstained ribbons.
A huge, dense elm tree in the middle spreads
Its ancient arms. They say this is the roost
Of lying dreams, which cling beneath each leaf.
A great array of monsters has its stables
There at the gates: half-­human Scyllas, Centaurs,
The Lernaean horror-­hissing beast, the hundred
Arms of Briareus, Chimeran flames,
Gorgons and Harpies, Geryon’s ghost with three forms.
Aeneas snatched his sword in sudden terror,
And held it up against the shapes approaching.
Had not his shrewd guide said these flitting things
Were flimsy forms, illusions lacking bodies,
He would have rushed to stab them, to no purpose.
The road leads to the river Acheron:
A whirlpool’s endless chasm seethes with thick mud;
Cocytus drinks the vomit of the sand.
Guarding these waters is a ghastly boatman,
The squalid, fearsome Charon, with his white beard
In massive snarls, with fixed and fiery eyes,
His dirty cloak hangs from a shoulder knot.
He poles his boat along and sets the sails,
Conveying corpses in his rust-­red vessel.
Old age in him—a god—is fresh and strong.
All of the mob comes pouring to the shore:
Mothers and grown men and the lifeless bodies
Of daring heroes; boys, unmarried girls,
Young men their parents saw placed on the pyre;
As many as the woodland leaves that fall
At the first frost, or birds that flock to land
From the high seas when freezing winter drives them
Across the great gulf into sunny lands.
Ghosts stand and beg to be the first to cross,
Stretching their hands out, yearning for the far shore.
But the grim boatman makes his choice among them
And shoves the rest far back across the beach.
Aeneas, awed and saddened by this chaos,
Asked, “Tell me, why this rush down to the river?
What do these souls want? Why do some retreat
Up the banks, others row the gloomy water?”
The ancient priestess made a brief reply.
“Son of Anchises, heaven’s true child! These
Are the deep-­pooling Cocytus and Styx’ swamp.
Gods swear by it and keep their word, in terror.
This helpless crowd you see has not been buried.
The boatman, Charon there, transports the others.
He cannot bring them past the grisly banks
And roaring stream until their bones find rest.
They flit a hundred years around this shore,
Then are let through, home to the pools they long for.”
Anchises’ son now halted in his footsteps,
Brooding in pity on that desolate fate.
He saw there wretched souls deprived of death rites,
Leucaspis and the Lycian fleet’s commander,
Orontes. On the stormy way from Troy
A southern gale engulfed them with their ship.
And there the helmsman Palinurus paces,
Who in mid-­voyage from Africa had fallen
Overboard off the stern while tracking stars.
Aeneas barely recognized his sad form
In so much darkness. “Palinurus! Which god
Tore you from us and plunged you in mid-­ocean?
Tell me! When did Apollo ever cheat me
In prophesying, but about yourself?
He told me you would reach Italian shores
Uninjured. Is this how he keeps his promise?”
He answered, “No, Anchises’ son, my leader,
The oracle was truthful. No god drowned me.
The rudder that I clutched and steered the ship by
Was simply ripped away, and I, its keeper,
Fell, dragging it along. I swear by rough seas,
It was your ship I feared for, robbed of tackle,
Its pilot overboard—not for myself.
Would it now falter under these huge waves?
Three stormy nights a violent South Wind drove me
Over unending sea, and on the fourth day,
From a wave’s crest I just glimpsed Italy.
I struggled on and would have landed safely
Had not a cruel tribe come at me with swords—
Stupid: I was no prize. Weighed down by wet clothes,
I clutched the jagged cliff top where I landed.
The windy breakers hold me, roll me now.
I beg you by the sky’s sweet light and air,
Your father, and your hopes as Iulus grows,
Save me, unconquered hero. Either sail
To Velia’s port again and bury me
Or, if your deathless mother knows a way
(For I believe the power of gods has brought you
To these great rivers and the Stygian swamp),
Have pity, take my hand, convey me over,
Give me at least a place of peace in death.”
These were his pleas; the prophetess retorted:
“This wish of yours is monstrous, Palinurus—
To see cold-­blooded Styx, the Furies’ river,
To go down there, unburied and unsummoned?
Don’t try to plead away the gods’ decrees.
But hear and keep this comfort for your hard fate.
The cities all around your tomb, obeying
Signs from the high gods, will appease your bones.
They’ll raise a tomb and give it sacrifices;
The land there will be named for you forever.”
This eased the anguish of his heart a short time:
A place named after him—it made him glad.
They pressed ahead from there and neared the river.
But now from streaming Styx the boatman saw them
Walk through the quiet woods and toward the bank.
He was the first to speak, with this rebuke:
“Who are you, marching down here with your weapons?
Stay where you are, and quick, explain yourself.
This is the place of ghosts, sleep, drowsy night:
This boat of Styx may not take living bodies.
To my regret, I shipped great Hercules
Across the lake, and Theseus with his comrade
Pirithoüs, unconquered sons of gods.
The first one came to chain the guardian hell hound,
And dragged him trembling from beneath the king’s throne;
The others tried to take our lady captive—
From Dis’ bed!” But Apollo’s seer spoke briefly:
“Don’t be afraid—we have no plotting purpose;
These arms are peaceful. For all time, that huge guard
May turn ghosts pale by baying in his cave,
The girl stay in her uncle’s house, unsullied.
Renowned Aeneas, upright, fierce in battle,
Goes to the shades below to find his father.
The sight of such devotion doesn’t move you?
You know this, then”—the branch, which she drew out
From her clothes’ folds. His swelling rage subsided,
And neither spoke. The hallowed gift amazed him,
The branch of fate—so long since he had seen it!
He turned the dark ship to approach the bank,
Shoved the souls from their seats along the benches,
And cleared the gangways. Towering Aeneas
Boarded the hollow leather boat. Its stitching
Groaned at his weight, the swamp poured through the gaps.
But the barge set the prophetess and hero
Safe on the muck, among gray reeds, at last.
Cerberus sprawled immense there in his cave.
The baying of his three throats filled that kingdom.
The snakes rose on his neck, but then the seer
Threw him a cake of drug-­soaked grain and honey.
With his three gaping mouths, in savage hunger,
He seized it, and his monstrous arch of spine
Melted, to stretch his huge form through the grotto.
Aeneas passed the guard, now sunk in sleep,
And hurried from the hopeless river’s banks.
Now a loud howling struck them from the spirits
Of babies: they were crying at the entrance.
They had no share in sweet life. At the breast,
An early death—black day—had swallowed them.
Next were those executed on false charges.
Jurors, assigned by lot, appoint the homes here.
Minos the judge draws names for voiceless panels
And hears what every life now stands accused of.
Beyond this, dismal suicides are lodged.
Though innocent, they threw away their breath
In hatred of the light. But now they’d cherish
Hardships and poverty beneath the sky!
Divine law and the hateful grim swamp trap them.
Around them Styx, with its nine loops, is tied.
She pointed out the nearby Fields of Mourning—
This is their name—that stretch in all directions.
There hidden tracks, bordered by myrtle trees,
Shelter the victims of cruel, wasting love.
Even in death their passions do not leave them.
Phaedra was here, Procris, and Eriphyle
(Who sadly showed the wounds from her cruel child),
Pasiphaë, Evadne; Laodamia
And Caeneus, once a young man, now a woman—
Since fate had changed her back—walked by their sides.
Phoenician Dido wandered in that broad wood,
Her wound still fresh; and when the Trojan hero
Encountered her and recognized her dim form
Through shadows, as a person sees the new moon
Through clouds—or thinks he sees it—as it rises,
He wept and spoke to her in tender love:
“Poor Dido, then the messenger was right—
Your own hand held the blade that brought your death?
And it was my fault? By the stars, the high gods,
And any truth below the earth: my queen,
It was against my will I left your country,
And by the orders of the gods, who now
Ordain my journey through this shadowed squalor,
These depths of night. I couldn’t have believed
That I would bring such pain by my departure.
Stay here—don’t back away, but let me see you.
Who are you running from? Fate gives this last chance
To speak to you.” She only glared in fury
While he was pleading, while he called up tears.
Her eyes stayed on the ground, her face averted,
As changeless in expression, while he spoke,
As granite or a jagged marble outcrop.
At last she darted bitterly away
To the dark forest, where her spouse, Sychaeus,
Felt for her sorrow and returned her love.
Aeneas, no less shaken by her hard fate,
Followed her with a tearful gaze of pity.
On the appointed path he struggled forward.
They reached the famous warriors’ distant fields.
Tydeus met them, and Parthenopaeus,
Splendid in warfare, and Adrastus’ pale form.
Here were slain Trojans, wept for terribly
Above. Aeneas groaned at long ranks: Glaucus,
Medon, Thersilochus, Antenor’s three sons,
Ceres’ priest Polyboetes, and Idaeus
Still clinging to his arms and chariot.
The souls were crowding at his right and left.
Not happy with one look, they held him back,
To walk with him and learn why he had come.
But the Greek lords and Agamemnon’s cohorts
Were terrified to see the hero’s weapons
Flash through the shadows; some were turning, running,
As once they’d scampered to their ships, some squeaking—
Their open mouths were thwarted: no shouts came.
He saw Deïphobus, the son of Priam,
All mangled, with cruel slashes on his face
And both his hands, his ears stripped from his head,
His nose grotesquely lopped. He shrank back, trying
To hide these awful wounds. Aeneas hardly
Recognized him, but kinship made him speak:
“Great warrior, from the noble blood of Teucer,
By whose cruel choice did such afflictions come?
Who had such power over you? They told me
You’d used your strength up killing Greeks that last night
And fallen on a heap of muddled carnage.
On the Troad’s shore I raised an empty tomb,
Sent three shouts to the spirits. There your weapons
And name remain, but friend, I never saw you.
I couldn’t set you in our country’s earth.”
Priam’s son answered, “You neglected nothing.
You did your duty by my ghost and me.
Fate and the Spartan woman’s fatal sin
Engulfed me in this torment—her memento.
You know how we were duped, and celebrated
That last night? But there’s no forgetting it.
The fatal horse, pregnant with infantry,
Leaped to our citadel, steep Pergamum,
And Helen led around our Trojan women
In a sham Bacchic rite and held a great torch
Herself: our tower signaled to the Greeks.
Anxiety had worn me into dull sleep
In my unlucky bed. A sweet, deep rest,
Peaceful as death, muffled me as I lay there.
Meanwhile my prize wife cleared the house of weapons—
Even the trusted sword beneath my pillow.
She opened up our door to Menelaus—
Hoping, I guess, this favor to her old flame
Would kill the stink of all her crimes before.
I’ll make it brief: they burst in, with Ulysses,
Who’s behind every crime. Gods, pay the Greeks back!
Mine is a reverent tongue that asks this favor!
But come—now you: what brought you here still living?
Were you off course in voyaging, and swept down?
Did gods direct you? What tormenting fortune
Shows you this sunless town, this sea of darkness?”
Aurora’s rosy chariot in the ether
Soared past the zenith while the two were talking.
They might have used up all the time permitted.
Aeneas’ guide, the Sibyl, curtly warned him:
“Night rushes on, and tears take up the hours.
The road divides here. This branch on the right,
Which stretches to the walls of powerful Dis,
Will take us to Elysium. The left one
Sends culprits to their due in Tartarus.”
“Great priestess, don’t be angry,” said the dead man.
“I’ll take my place again in that dark cohort.
Go on, Troy’s glory. May your fate be better.”
Then he retreated, as he finished speaking.
Aeneas turned, and right there, to his left—
A fortress with three walls beneath a cliff.
A raging stream of flame called Phlegethon,
With crashing, whirling boulders, rings it, facing
Huge gates and columns made of solid steel.
No human strength, no strength of gods at war
Could tear it up. An iron tower soars.
Tisiphone, unsleeping, guards the gates
Day and night, in her hitched-­up bloody robe.
From inside echo savage blows and groans,
The shriek of iron and the drag of chains.
Terror transfixed Aeneas at the din.
“What crimes did they commit? Pure virgin, tell me!
How are they punished? What loud howls are rising!”
“Great Trojan leader,” she replied, “no good man
Enters this wicked place; but Hecate,
When she assigned me these Avernan groves,
Led me around to all the gods’ reprisals.
Here Cretan Rhadamanthus rules, unyielding.
He puts each life on trial, extracts confessions
Of sins not expiated there above,
Hidden with stupid relish, till too late.
Tisiphone, who’s ready with her whip,
Swoops down for vengeance, aiming vicious snakes
From her left hand, and calls her sisters’ cruel ranks.
Finally, with a grisly scream of hinges,
The holy doors fall open. Do you see
Her form that sits and guards the entranceway?
A fiercer monster lives inside, the Hydra,
With fifty black throats. Tartarus itself
Plunges next—twice as far, beneath the shades,
As a gaze toward Olympus in the aether.
Titans, an ancient earth-­born race, struck down
By lightning long ago, writhe at the bottom.
Aloeus’ giant twins are there—I’ve seen them.
They tried to wrench away the towering sky,
Attack the gods above, dethrone their ruler.
There I saw Salmoneus cruelly punished—
He’d aped Jove’s flames and the Olympian thunder.
Shaking a torch, he drove his chariot
In triumph through Greek nations, through his city
Of Elis, claiming honors of the gods—
Fool: the inimitable thundercloud
Shammed by the sound of hooves that beat on bronze!
Then the almighty father hurled his weapon—
Which was no guttering pine torch—through the clouds
And drove him headlong in a monstrous whirlwind.
Tityos, reared by all-­begetting Earth,
Was there to see, stretched over nine whole acres.
A giant vulture with its hooked beak browses
His deathless liver. Through pain-­fertile innards
It burrows, feeds—lives deep inside his torso;
And with no rest, his viscera grow back.
A crag of flint that hangs above two Lapiths,
Ixion and Pirithoüs, seems set
To topple any second. Banquet couches
Rear high, with shining gold posts. Splendid food
Is spread before their eyes. But the chief Fury,
The guest beside them, will not let them touch it.
She leaps up, thrusts her torch at them, and roars.
Souls who while living hated brothers, struck
Their fathers, or wove fraud around dependents;
And those who crouched alone on newfound riches
(The largest crowd), not sharing with their families;
Slaughtered adulterers; and rebel soldiers,
Bold criminals, betrayers of their lords:
Locked up, all wait for sentencing. Don’t query
The kinds of torment Fortune’s plunged them in.
Some roll immense rocks, some are splayed on wheel spokes.
Poor Theseus sits there—he’ll sit forever.
Phlegyas in his torture shrieks a warning
To everyone—his voice rings through the shadows:
‘Learn justice from my fate, and fear the gods!’
One sold his country and imposed a tyrant;
One, for a price, made laws and then remade them.
One stormed his daughter’s room—a lawless marriage.
All of them dared great evil and succeeded.
A hundred tongues and mouths, a voice of iron
Wouldn’t allow me to describe the crimes
In all their forms, or list the punishments.”
The ancient priestess of Apollo added,
“Come, hurry on. Finish the task you started.
Faster! I see the walls the Cyclopes
Forged. There’s a gateway underneath the arch
Where we must put our gifts, as we were told to.”
They stepped along the dark route, side by side,
Crossed the gap quickly, and approached the doors.
Aeneas flicked fresh water on his body
And faced the sill, and set the branch there, upright.
Their duty to the goddess done at last,
They came into a glad land: pleasant grounds
In forests of good fortune, blessèd home.
A richer, shimmering air arrays these fields,
Which have their own familiar sun and stars.
Men exercised in grassy fields, competed
In games, or wrestled on the tawny sand.
Some stamped their dancing feet and chanted songs.
And there the Thracian singer, in his long robe,
Played to the beat, through seven intervals,
Changing between his ivory pick and fingers.
Here was the ancient dynasty of Teucer,
Handsome, courageous, born in better years:
Ilus, Assaracus, Dardanus, Troy’s founder.
Aeneas gazed at ghostly chariots
Far off, and armor, planted spears, and horses
Grazing untethered. The delight the living
Take in their arms and chariots, the fondness
For pasturing bright beasts survive the tomb.
Aeneas looked from side to side: some heroes
Feasted and sang a joyous hymn of praise
Among sweet laurel stands. Eridanus
Rolled its great waves into the world above.
This group was wounded fighting for their country;
These, while they lived, had been pure priests; these prophets
Were righteous and deserved to speak for Phoebus.
Some had enriched our life with their inventions,
Or left the memory of some great service.
All of them had white bands around their foreheads.
They poured around the Sibyl. She addressed
Musaeus chiefly (all that huge crowd gazed up:
He towered, massive-­shouldered, in the center):
“Tell me, you happy souls, and you, great singer,
Where can we find Anchises, in which quarter?
For him we sailed through Erebus’ wide waters.”
With a few words the hero answered her:
“We have no houses here. Our homes are dim woods,
Stream banks our couches, verdant, flowing meadows
Our settlements. But if you speak your heart’s wish,
Come up this easy path to climb the ridge.”
He stepped ahead and showed the shining plains
That stretched below, but soon they left the high ground.
Father Anchises, in a low green valley,
Devotedly surveyed the souls confined there
Before emerging to the light. He happened
Now to be tallying his dear descendants—
Lives, destinies, achievements, characters—
And when he saw Aeneas making toward him
Over the grass, he stretched his hands out, blissful.
The tears poured down his cheeks, and he exclaimed.
“You’ve come at last? Love would win out, I knew,
On this hard road. And can I see your face,
My child, hear your beloved voice, and answer?
Really, I counted on this, calculated
The time, and anxious hope could not deceive me!
Welcome! How many lands and wide seas sent you,
My son, and on what giant waves of danger!
I feared the Libyan realms would injure you.
Aeneas answered, “Father, your sad image,
Which often meets me, called me to this place.
My ships stand in the Tuscan sea. My hand—
Clasp it and don’t retreat from my embrace.”
The tears poured down his face. Three times he tried
To throw his arms around his father’s neck,
Three times the form slid from his useless hands,
Like weightless wind or dreams that fly away.
The hero now saw, at the valley’s end,
A sheltered woods. Wind murmured in its branches.
The river Lethe drifted past the still homes.
Above the water, souls from countless nations
Flitted, like bees in tranquil summer meadows
Who move from bud to vivid bud and stream
Around white lilies—all the field whirs loudly.
The unexpected sight enthralled Aeneas.
He wished to learn about it—what the stream was,
And what men filled the banks in that great phalanx.
Father Anchises answered, “These are souls
Fate owes new bodies. Here at Lethe’s water
They drink up long oblivion and peace.
All of this time, I’ve yearned to tell of them
And let you see them, counting my descendants,
To share my joy that you’ve reached Italy.”
“Father, do some souls really soar back skyward
From here, returning into sluggish bodies?
What dreadful longing sends them toward the light?”
“I’ll free you from suspense, my child,” he answered,
And told it all, in detail and in order.
“At first, an inner spirit nurtures earth
And sky, the water’s plains, the moon’s bright globe,
The sun and stars; and mind infuses each part
And animates the mass of all there is.
Thus arise humans, grazing beasts, and creatures
That fly, and monsters in the glittering ocean.
Their seeds have fiery force; these come from heaven.
And yet the noxious body slows them somewhat.
The earthly parts that perish make them numb.
Those parts bring fear, desire, joy, and sorrow.
Souls in dark dungeons cannot see the sky.
When, on the final day, a life departs,
Not every evil sickness of the body
Wholly withdraws from that poor spirit—many
Are long grown in, mysteriously ingrained.
So souls are disciplined and pay the price
Of old wrongdoing. Some are splayed, exposed
To hollow winds; a flood submerges some,
Washing out wickedness; fire scorches some pure.
Each bears his own ghost; then a few are sent
To live in broad Elysium’s happy fields,
Till time’s great circle is completed, freeing
The hardened stain so the ethereal mind,
The fire of pure air, is left untainted.
When they have circled through a thousand years,
God calls them all in one long rank to Lethe,
To send them back forgetful to the sky’s vault,
With a desire to go back into bodies.”
Anchises finished, and he drew the two guests
Into the middle of the rumbling crowd.
He climbed a ridge that showed him every man
In the long line. He knew each face approaching.
“Come, hear your destiny, the future glory
Of Dardanus’ long line, all the descendants
We are to have from the Italian race—
Great souls who will be born into our family.
That young man leaning on a headless spear
Will take the next turn in the airy light:
Your posthumous son Silvius (a name
From Alba), first of Troy’s Italian bloodline.
Lavinia will raise him in the forest,
And he will be a king and father kings:
Our family that will reign in Alba Longa.
By him stands Procas, glory of Troy’s race,
Followed by Capys, Numitor, Aeneas
Silvius, your high-­hearted, blameless namesake—
If ever he succeeds to Alba’s kingship.
What fine young men! You see the strength in them.
Oak leaves of civic honor shade their temples.
They’ll found Nomentum, Gabii, Fidenae,
The fortress of Collatia in the mountains,
Pometii, Castrum Inui, Bola, Cora—
The famous names of places nameless now.
Romulus, Mars’ child, Trojan through his mother,
Will join Mars’ father, by his side above.
You see the twin crests? They’re a special emblem
The father of the gods already gives him.
Under the omens this man saw, renowned Rome
Will rule the world and raise her heart to heaven;
Blessed in her sons, with one wall ringing seven
Citadels: like the tower-­crowned Great Mother,
Driving her chariot through Phrygian cities,
Holding in blissful arms her hundred grandsons
From gods—all gods themselves, who live in heaven.
Now turn your eyes here, see this clan—your Romans:
Caesar, and all of Iulus’ offspring, destined
To make their way to heaven’s splendid heights.
Here is the god’s son you have often heard
Promised, Augustus Caesar, who will bring
Another age of gold to Saturn’s old realm,
Latium. Past India he’ll take our rule,
Beyond the Garamantes and the sun’s path
That marks the year, where Atlas hefts the sky
And turns the high vault set with burning stars.
The Caspian realm, the land around Maeotis
Already quake at prophecies—he’s coming!
All the Nile’s seven mouths are in confusion.
Hercules didn’t travel through so much land
To pierce the bronze-­hoofed deer or tame the woods
Of Erymanthus, or make Lerna tremble
Under his bow; nor Bacchus, flexing vine reins,
Whom tigers drew in triumph from high Nysa.
Shall we hang back and not exert our courage,
Fearing to stake our claim in Italy?
Who is that, far off, olive-­crowned, and bringing
A sacrifice? White hair, white beard—I know him:
This Roman king will found the new-­built city
On laws. From little Cures with its poor soil
He’ll rise to great dominion. But that next one,
Tullus, will break the country’s peace and rouse
Its men, who’ve grown unused to victories.
Next is the boaster Ancus, even now
Drunk on the breezes of the people’s favor.
Now shall I show you Tarquin kings and Brutus,
The proud avenger, winning back the fasces—
First consul, with that office’s harsh axes?
For splendid freedom’s sake he’ll have his own sons
Put to death, when they stir up war again—
Poor man, though ages after him applaud.
Love for his country, greed for praise will triumph.
Torquatus with his savage ax, the Drusi
And Decii, Camillus, who’ll bring home
Our standards. See those two in bright matched armor,
Souls in accord while night imprisons them.
But once they reach the light, how great a war
They’ll rouse, what ranks of death, father-­in-­law
Come down the bouldered Alps from high Monoecus,
And son-­in-­law deploying all the East.
Children, don’t lose your horror of such warfare.
Don’t turn your massive strength against your country.
You of the gods’ stock: take the lead, have mercy!
My son, throw down your weapons!
Mummius—there!—in triumph over Corinth’s
Slain Greeks will ride up to the Capitol;
Paullus will root out Agamemnon’s town
And Argos: Perseus, Achilles’ heir,
Will pay for Troy and Pallas’ sullied shrine.
Great Cato, Cossus, who could pass you over?
Gracchus’ sons?—Scipios, the twin war-­lightning
Fellers of Libya?—or that resourceful
Fabricius, or Serranus, furrow-­sower?
You, Fabii, seize my weary sight: your Greatest
Will be Rome’s sole protector—through his stalling!
Others, I know, will beat out softer-­breathing
Bronze shapes, or draw from marble living faces,
Excel in pleading cases, chart the sky’s paths,
Predict the rising of the constellations.
But Romans, don’t forget that world dominion
Is your great craft: peace, and then peaceful customs;
Sparing the conquered, striking down the haughty.”
They were amazed. Father Anchises added,
“See how Marcellus marches in the glory
Of the Rich Spoils, an over-­towering victor.
This knight will save a Rome in chaos, crushing
Carthage and rebel Gaul; he’ll make our third gift
Of captured rebel arms to Quirinus.”
Aeneas saw a fine youth in bright armor,
Walking beside Marcellus—but his face
Was overcast, his eyes fixed on the ground.
“Father, who’s that companion of the hero?
A son perhaps, or grandson of that great stock?
What a fine presence, what great praise around him!
But black night winds sad shadows round his head.”
Father Anchises then began to sob:
“My son, don’t ask about your clan’s great sorrow.
Fate will give just a glimpse of him on earth.
Deities, you decreed the Roman race
Would be too mighty if it kept this gift.
What loud laments from citizens will Mars’ Field
Send up to Mars’ great city! What processions
Will Tiber see when gliding by the new tomb!
No boy of Trojan blood will raise more hope
In Latin forebears. In no other nursling
Will Romulus’ land ever glory more.
Rectitude, old-­time honor, strength unbeaten
In war! Nobody meeting him in battle
Could have escaped him as he came on foot
Or gored a horse’s foam-­flecked side with spurs.
Poor boy—if you could only break this cruel fate!
You’ll be Marcellus. Let me give the gifts
I can: armloads of lilies, purple flowers,
Scattered in empty ritual for the soul
Of my descendant.” Through the airy, broad fields
They wandered now, surveying everything.
Anchises led his son to all the sights,
And fired the lust for glory in the future,
Then told about the wars he soon must fight,
Laurentian tribes, the city of Latinus,
How to endure or else avoid each hardship.
There are two gates of sleep. The one, they say,
Is horn: true shades go out there easily;
The other—shining, white, well-­crafted ivory—
Lets spirits send false dreams up toward the sky.
His speeches done, Anchises brought his son here,
And sent him with the Sibyl through the ivory.
Aeneas went straight back, to ships and comrades,
Then coasted to the harbor of Caieta.
The prows dropped anchors; sterns stood on the shore.
