Dawn rose away from Ocean. Though Aeneas
Chafed to inter his friends, though he was tortured
By grief, he took the time, as morning broke,
To make his promised victory offerings.
He lopped the branches from a huge oak, set it
In a mound, decked it with Mezentius
The chieftain’s shining armor as a trophy
For the war god, attached the broken spear,
The blood-­soaked crest, the pierced and battered breastplate;
At its left side, the figure held the shield;
From the neck hung the ivory-­hilted sword.
Aeneas spoke to spur the Trojan leaders,
All cheering in a close-­packed crowd around him,
“Fighters, these first fruits, spoils a proud king yielded,
Are no small prize. Look forward, without fear.
This is Mezentius, work of my hands.
Now we’ll attack the Latin king and town.
Prepare for war with bold anticipation.
Don’t let fear, second thoughts, or callow minds
Render you slow and unprepared when gods
Consent to standards hoisted, troops led out.
Now we must give the earth our comrades’ bodies:
No other honor waits in Acheron.
Go, grant the final tribute to the great souls
Who won this country for us with their blood.
But first send Pallas to Evander’s city—
How it will mourn! An early death, a black day
Engulfed this warrior, who was no coward.”
He spoke in tears, then walked back to the doorway,
Where Pallas’ corpse was laid out. Old Acoetes
Guarded it, who had been Evander’s squire
Back in Arcadia, but with worse omens
Was sent with his dear foster child—around whom
His retinue now stood, with Trojan soldiers
And Trojan women, hair unbound in mourning.
And when Aeneas came beneath the high gates,
The people beat their breasts and raised a moan
To the stars; heavy grief rang through the king’s house.
When he saw Pallas’ ivory face, his propped head,
And the wide wound from the Italian spear point
In his smooth chest, Aeneas sobbed and spoke:
“My poor boy, were you all that changing fortune
Begrudged me? You will never see my kingdom
Or ride back to your father’s home in triumph.
This isn’t how I pledged to care for you
Before Evander, with farewell embraces,
Sent me to win a mighty realm, though warning
I’d fight a rugged nation and fierce soldiers.
Perhaps right now the king, a dupe of hope,
Heaps altars with his gifts, prays for your safety,
While—empty honor—we in grief escort
This youth, who now owes nothing to the gods.
How cruel, how pitiful to see his son dead!
Is this the glorious return we hoped for?
Is my great trust fulfilled? Yet you, his father,
Will see no wounded back, mark of a coward,
Or pray for death yourself because he’s living.
Italy, Iulus, what a shield you’ve lost!”
He ordered them to raise the corpse they pitied.
Choosing a thousand men from all his forces,
He sent them to attend the final honors
And share the father’s tears—for such a great loss
Small comfort, yet it was that poor man’s due.
Others worked urgently to weave a bier
Out of soft oak-tree and arbutus branches;
To build a couch and leafy canopy.
High on this rustic bed they laid the boy out,
Like a plucked blossom in a young girl’s hand,
A drooping hyacinth or tender violet—
Its beauty and its brightness lingering,
But without food or strength from Mother Earth.
Aeneas brought two robes out, stiff with gold
And purple dye, made long ago by Dido
Of Sidon, happy in the task. Her own hands
Had worked the fine gold threads into the weave.
He chose one—sad last gift—and drew it up
Over the young man’s hair, which soon would burn.
He heaped up spoils from the Laurentian battle
And had them taken in a long procession,
Along with spears and mounts, the boy’s own plunder.
He’d bound the hands of captives, offerings
To the dead, for blood to sprinkle on the flames.
He had his captains carry tree trunks labeled
With hostile names, and hung with hostile arms.
Men led Acoetes, ruined by old age.
He clawed his face and bruised his chest with pounding
And then fell forward, sprawling, on the earth.
Blood-­soaked Rutulian chariots filed by,
And then came Pallas’ warhorse, Aethon, stripped
Of ornaments, face soaked in his great tears;
Then the youth’s spear and helmet—Turnus claimed
The rest. Trojans, Arcadians, Etruscans,
Their arms reversed, came in a sad array.
And when this whole procession had filed forward
Aeneas stopped and gave a heavy sigh.
“This war doomed others I am called to mourn.
Farewell forever now, my splendid Pallas—
Bless you for all time.” Now the man fell silent
And walked back to his camp with its high walls.
Olive-­crowned legates from the Latin city
Were there to ask a favor: the return
Of slaughtered bodies scattered on the plain.
Would he now let an earth mound cover them?
Lightless, defeated, they were not at war;
He ought to show past hosts and in-­laws mercy.
Their pleas were not repulsed by good Aeneas—
Graciously he assented, and continued:
“How is it you’re caught up in this cruel war
You don’t deserve? Why do you run from friends?
Now for the sake of those who died in battle
You plead for peace. I’d give it to the living!
I only claim the home fate grants me here.
It’s not your people but your king I’m fighting,
Who broke our guest bond, trusting Turnus’ weapons—
It ought to have been Turnus facing death.
Aiming to fight this out and drive the Trojans
Away, he should have met me hand to hand
And let a god or fighting skill decide it.
Go now, and light the pyres of your poor people.”
The men were stricken by his words; their eyes
Turned to each other, and they held their peace.
Old Drances, always hostile and accusing
Toward the young Turnus, spoke up in reply:
“Hero of Troy, great in your fame, but greater
In battle, how could I extol you more—
Admiring first your prowess or your justice?
We’ll gladly take your message to our city
And join you to our king, Latinus—Fortune
Allowing. Turnus needs his own alliance.
We’re happy to haul stones on our own shoulders
And raise the destined walls of your new Troy.”
They all roared their assent once he had finished.
A twelve-­day truce was made, and in its calm
Trojans and Latins roamed the woods and mountains
Unharmed together. Double axes rang
On high ash trees, and soaring pines were toppled.
Steadily, they split oak and fragrant cedar
With wedges; wagons groaned with mountain ash.
Now Rumor, who’d just told of Pallas’ triumph
In Latium, flew with early news of anguish
To blight Evander’s heart and house and city.
Snatching up torches for their ancient death rites,
Arcadians swarmed the gate. A row of flames
Stretched down the road; light split the land in two.
The retinue of Trojans joined their ranks
Of mourning. Matrons saw them reach the houses
And set the town alight with shouts of grief.
No one was strong enough to hold Evander.
Where the bier stood, he pushed into the crowd
And fell on Pallas, crying, clinging, groaning.
At last his torment let a few words through:
“Pallas, this isn’t what you promised me,
Caution in trusting wild Mars with your life.
But I knew how a first campaign can be—
The sweet allure of glory when it’s new.
Sorry first offering, and hard first lesson
In war so close at hand! Not one god heard
My prayers and pledges. Oh, my blessèd wife,
Lucky in death, since you don’t feel this pain!
I’ve triumphed over death—outlived my son.
If only I had gone along and buried
My own life in the spears of the Rutulians,
And this procession brought me home—not Pallas!
Trojans, you’re not to blame, and not our friendship
Or treaty. For my old age this was fated.
Though he was bound to die, there will be comfort:
He killed so many thousand Volscians
And fell while leading Trojans into Latium.
And Pallas, I could wish no rites more worthy
Than good Aeneas and the Trojan lords,
The Tuscan captains, and the whole force give you.
They bring huge trophies of the men you slaughtered.
Turnus, you’d stand here too, a log with weapons,
If Pallas were your age, with strength to match it.
My grief, still, mustn’t hinder Trojan warfare.
Go, tell your king that with my Pallas gone,
I keep my hated life because he knows
His sword owes Turnus both to son and father.
His luck and heroism are for this.
My fate forbids me joy in life—but let me
Bring my son word among the dead below.”
Meanwhile, Dawn raised reviving light and summoned
Wretched mankind back to its work and hardship.
Father Aeneas on the curved shore now
Joined Tarchon to build pyres for each man’s dead,
For the old rite of burning. Kindling black flames,
They hid the towering sky in murky darkness.
In their bright armor, soldiers marched three times
Around the lighted pyres. Three times the horsemen
Circled the dismal fires and raised their wails.
Their tears rained on the weapons and the earth,
And warriors’ cries and horn blasts struck the skies.
Some threw in plunder torn from slaughtered Latins:
Helmets and fine swords, bridles, wheels that once
Seethed against axles. Other men gave gifts
The dead knew: their own shields and losing weapons.
Oxen were sacrificed to Death on all sides.
Bristly boars, livestock seized from every pasture
Bled from their throats into the fire. The beach
Was full of friends who watched friends burn and nursed
The half-­dead pyres and clung there till damp night
Wheeled round a sky bejeweled with burning stars.
Elsewhere the Latins too, in desolation,
Built countless pyres. Out of the throng of bodies,
Some were interred, some carried to the country
Nearby, and others sent back to the city.
The rest they burned, a heap of muddled carnage,
Uncounted and unhonored. Ravaged fields
Were glowing with an avid crowd of fires.
A third dawn swept away the chill of darkness.
The mourners leveled jumbled bones and ash piles
And heaped the warm earth on them in a mound.
But in the homes of rich Latinus’ city
The drawn-­out shrieks of mourning were the loudest.
Here mothers and their sons’ poor wives and sisters,
Tenderly sorrowing, and orphaned children
Cursed the disastrous war and Turnus’ wedding:
He ought to fight it out since he demanded
Italy’s kingship and the highest honors.
Drances was there to goad them on, attesting
That Turnus had been challenged—no one else.
Yet Turnus had his various supporters;
He sheltered in the glory of the great queen
And could rely on fame from his own trophies.
And now, amid the flames of this contention,
Came this: from Diomedes’ famous city
The envoys brought an answer: that huge effort
Had failed; the fervid pleas, the gifts of gold
Did nothing—“They must find another ally,
Or ask the Trojan ruler for a truce.”
The massive blow crushed even King Latinus.
The anger of the gods and these fresh tombs
Left no doubt: it was fate that brought Aeneas.
Therefore he summoned all his people’s leaders,
His council, for a meeting in his halls.
They streamed together to the palace, filling
The streets, and as the eldest and the king,
Grim-­faced Latinus took the central seat.
He asked to hear what answer had come back
From the Aetolian city, every detail
From start to finish. Then, a call for silence;
Venulus, ordered to begin, reported:
“Citizens, we came safely through our journey
To Diomedes in his Argive camp
And touched the hand that brought Troy’s kingdom down.
We found him laying out a city, named
After his clan, in Iapygian country
He’s won near Garganus. Let in, let speak,
We proffered gifts and told our names and nation,
And who made war on us, and why we’d come
To Arpi. With a tranquil face, he answered:
‘O ancient, fortunate Italian races,
Kingdoms of Saturn. After your long peace,
What lures you, what incites you into war?
All of us who laid waste to Troy have paid
Horribly for our crimes throughout the world.
(And what of fighters sunk in Simoïs,
And all our anguish under those high walls?)
Priam would weep for us! Witness Minerva’s
Storm, and the vengeful cliff Caphereus.
We’re scattered to the world’s ends—Menelaus
Clear out to Proteus’ columns, and Ulysses
To Etna’s Cyclopes. And the short reign
Of Neoptolemus? Idomeneus’
Shattered home? Locrians in Libya?
The great Greeks’ Mycenaean leader reached
His threshold to be butchered by his wife.
He’d conquered Asia, but her lover lurked.
The gods begrudged me my ancestral altars,
My yearned-­for wife, and lovely Calydon.
I’m hounded even now by grisly visions
Of friends changed into birds that fluttered skyward
And now roam rivers—monstrous punishment:
The cliffs re-­echo with their sobbing calls—
But what was I expecting since the moment
I lost my mind and lunged at a divine form,
Profaning Venus’ right hand with a wound?
No, don’t urge more such battles—not on me.
Since Troy was overthrown, I have no quarrel
With Trojans. I did not enjoy those struggles.
Your country’s gifts you bring me—let Aeneas
Have them instead. I’ve fought him hand to hand,
Faced his cruel weapons. I know—so believe me—
How high he rears behind his shield, how fiercely
His spear whirls. Had Mount Ida’s country bred
Two more like him, Troy could have visited
On the Greek towns the mourning meant for Troy.
All that long siege of stubborn Ilium,
Ten years of victory stalling and retreating,
We owed to Hector and Aeneas only—
Both known for bravery and skill in war,
But one more righteous. Clasp hands, make a treaty:
You have the chance. Avoid a clash of arms.’
Sovereign, that sovereign sends you this reply,
And gives his view of this momentous war.”
He’d scarcely ceased—conflicting, anxious words
Raced among the Italians, like the roar
Of torrents choked by boulders, like the banks
Echoing back the clatter of the current.
But when the nervous crowd grew still, the king
Called on the gods, then spoke from his high throne.
“Latins, an early plan to meet this crisis
Would have been better than to call a meeting
Now, when the enemy blockades our walls.
How can we fight with children of the gods,
With these unwearying unconquered heroes?
Even when beaten, they don’t drop their swords!
Aetolian allies? Give that hope up now.
We all have hopes—you see what this one’s worth.
Everything else that’s ruined in our cause
You have before your own eyes—you can touch it.
I don’t blame anyone. You’ve reached the limits
Of courage, fought with all your nation’s strength.
Now listen while I tell you in a few words
The judgment that through all my doubts I’ve come to.
I have an old tract by the Tuscan river.
It stretches west, past the Sicanian border.
Auruncans and Rutulians plow and sow
Its hard hills; on the roughest heights their herds graze.
I’ll give it, and a strip of pine-­strewn summit,
In friendship to the Trojans. We must make
Fair terms with them and let them share the kingdom.
If they’re so eager, they can raise their walls
And settle. If it’s other lands they want,
And they’re allowed to leave our soil, we’ll build them
Twenty ships from our own Italian oak.
If they can man more, wood is on the coast.
How many boats, what kind of boats, they’ll tell us.
And we’ll supply the labor, bronze, and dockyards.
I’ll also send the hundred noblest Latins
To take the news and finalize the treaty.
These will present the olive boughs of peace,
And gold and ivory in standard measures,
And emblems of this reign, the robe and throne.
Confer together, save us from disaster.”
Drances, still hostile, rose; half-­hidden envy
Of Turnus’ stature galled him; he was lavish
With goods, and in his eloquence a hero—
But not in war—valued as an adviser,
A rabble-­rouser, though; his mother’s bloodline
Was splendid, though his father’s was obscure.
He now spoke, heaping up the fire of hatred:
“Good king, to all of us your plan makes sense.
What can I add? Everyone should acknowledge
Our town’s way forward, but they’re all too frightened.
He needs to stop his rants and let me speak.
Wayward and evil-­omened—let him threaten
A bloody death for saying this—he brought down
All those fine leaders, sank this town in grief,
When he attacked the Trojan fortress, shaking
His sword at heaven, though prepared to run.
Add one gift to the many that you send
And promise to the Trojans, peerless king:
You are a father—get a splendid son
By giving him your daughter. Don’t let threats
Deter you. Make the bond of peace eternal.
And if we’re terrified, let’s make our pleas
To Turnus here, and ask him, as a favor,
To let this king and country have their rights.
You are a curse on Latium! Why keep throwing
Your hapless people into open peril?
Turnus, the war can’t save us. We all beg you
For peace—which has one guarantee, so give it.
You say I hate you (shouldn’t I?)—but see,
I am the first to kneel. Pity your country.
Lay down your pride. You’re beaten—you should go.
We’re routed, slaughtered, so much land is razed—
If you want fame, and if your will’s so hard,
And if you need a palace as a dowry,
Meet your opponent face to face, with courage.
But no: to get a royal wife for Turnus,
We’ll scatter our cheap lives across the plain,
Unwept, unburied. If you have the strength
Or courage that your fathers had, go face
Your challenger.”
This kindled the ferocity of Turnus.
He growled, and these words broke from deep within him:
“Drances, your eloquence just overflows
Whenever war needs fighters. You arrive first
At each assembly. Your majestic words
Fill it while you stay safe, while earthworks bar
The enemy, and moats don’t fill with blood.
So thunder on as usual and call me
A coward when as many heaps of Trojans
Have died by your hand, when your splendid trophies
Litter the plain. Try for yourself what courage
And energy can do. We needn’t look far:
The enemy are all around our walls.
Shall we go face them now? Or will your fighting
Stay limited to feet that bolt, a tongue
Gusting away?
Me—beaten? Oh, you worm—who’d say that, seeing
The Tiber swelling with the blood of Trojans,
Arcadian armor stripped, Evander’s house
Brought down, without an heir? Does Bitias,
Does Pandarus, that giant, find me beaten?
The thousands I subdued and sent to Hades
While penned inside their walls and earthworks? War
Can’t save us? Chant these omens to the Trojans—
And to your own self, madman. Keep on muddling
Our plans with terror: that twice-­beaten nation
So powerful, our Latin arms so frail!
Myrmidon chiefs, Achilles from Larissa,
And Diomedes quake! The Aufidus
Retreats, flows backward from the Adriatic!
There’s more—this cunning bastard, when I taunt him,
Shams fear; it gives his allegations force.
My hand won’t take a soul like yours—don’t worry.
Keep it there, living in your worthless self.
Now to your grave deliberations, father.
If you can place no further hope in fighting,
If we’re abandoned, if from one retreat
Ruin prevails, and Fortune can’t turn back,
Let’s hold our weak hands out and beg for peace.
I long for any trace of our past courage,
And I prefer the man who won’t surrender,
Who’d rather bite the dust, once and for all:
He has the most heart, he’s most blessed in hardship.
But still we have supplies, and men to call on,
And allied towns and tribes in Italy;
The Trojans got their glory with a bloodbath:
The same storm fell on them, they have their losses.
Why shamefully give in already, quaking
Down to our toes before the trumpet sounds?
Often the changing work of shifting time
Brings good again. Commonly, Fortune alters
And sets her victims back on steady ground.
Arpi and its Aetolian king won’t help us;
Lucky Tolumnius, Messapus, leaders
From many towns will. Latium’s chosen troops,
Laurentum’s farms will get no petty fame.
And there’s Camilla of the noble Volsci
Leading her mounted squadrons, bright with bronze.
If Trojans challenge me to single combat,
And you say yes, since I’m our stumbling block,
I’m willing. Victory hasn’t yet rebuffed me:
No matter what the risk, to me it’s worth it.
He’s greater than Achilles and wears armor
Like his, which Vulcan made? I still will face him.
I’m Turnus, I’m the equal of my forebears.
To all you here, and to my future father,
I’ve vowed my life. I beg for single combat!
I don’t want Drances paying with his death
For the gods’ rage—or getting any glory.”
And so they wrangled in this time of danger.
Meanwhile, Aeneas moved his camp and forces.
The news sped through the palace, spreading uproar;
The city soon was overwhelmed with terror:
The Trojans and the Tuscans had deployed
Beside the Tiber and swept down the plain.
The common people were appalled and stricken
And stung into an even greater anger
And fevered calls for arms; youths roared for arms,
And fathers wept in fear. A racket rose
From all sides to the sky, a storm of discord;
As a flock clatters, settling in some tall grove,
Or swans call hoarsely as they pass above
Padusa river’s teeming, sounding shallows.
Turnus then seized his chance: “Yes, citizens!
Let’s call a meeting and sit praising peace
While they invade our land.” He said no more
But rushed away, out of the towering building.
“Volusus, call the Volsci, arm their squadrons,
Bring the Rutulians! Coras, with your brother!
Messapus! Spread your horsemen on the plain.
Block the approaches too, and man the towers.
The rest can follow me in the attack.”
Now the whole town stampeded to the walls.
Himself, the lord Latinus, in this crisis,
Fled the assembly, put off great endeavors,
Contrite that he’d not taken in Aeneas
Straight off, as son-­in-­law and city sharer.
They ditched below the gates and hauled in boulders
And spikes. The trumpet hoarsely called for blood.
Everyone came out: mothers and their children
Stood on the walls in an uneven line.
To Pallas’ temple on the heights the queen drove
With offerings, and matrons thronged around her.
Beside her was the girl Lavinia
(Cause of the havoc), looking down with fine eyes.
With gifts of incense, women sought the shrine;
Their sorrow echoed from the looming door.
“Strong-­weaponed chief of war, Tritonian virgin,
Shatter the Phrygian pirate’s spear and stretch him,
Face in the dirt, before our city gates.”
Fierce and impatient, Turnus dressed for battle.
Already he had on a ruddy breastplate
Bristling with scales, and gold greaves—though his head
Was still bare—and a sword hung at his side.
Bright with gold, from the stronghold’s heights he raced,
In thrilled anticipation of the fight,
As a horse breaks his rope, bolts from the barn,
And gains the open flatlands, finally free,
And gallops to the mares that crowd the pastures,
Or to the river that he used to bathe in,
Arching his neck exuberantly high,
While his mane plays across his neck and withers.
Royal Camilla with her Volscian force
Hurried to meet him. Right outside the gates
She now dismounted; her battalion likewise
Jumped down and stood before her as she spoke:
“If courage brings the confidence it should,
I’ll undertake to face Aeneas’ horsemen,
And ride alone against the mounted Tuscans:
I’ll go to meet the hazards of this war.
You take a stand on foot and guard the walls.”
A formidable girl—Turnus was staring:
“Glory of Italy! How could I thank you
Or decently repay you? But we know
Your matchless spirit: let me share your efforts.
Rumors, backed up by scouts, tell us Aeneas
Has insolently sent ahead light horsemen
To scour the plains. He’s coming to the city
Himself, across the steep unguarded ridge.
I plan an ambush at a covered path,
With armed guards in the woods, at both ways out.
Draw up your troops to meet the Tuscan horse charge,
With keen Messapus, and Tiburtus’ corps,
And Latin cavalry. Take joint command.”
He roused Messapus and the allied captains
Likewise, then set off toward his enemy.
There is a twisting valley—or a trap—
Darkly and thickly overgrown; two cliffs
Crowd from its sides; a wispy path leads in,
And at both ends the jaws are grim and narrow.
Above, among the soaring lookout places,
There is a hidden clearing, good for cover
To strike from, swooping from the left and right;
Boulders can be sent rolling down the slopes.
Swiftly, by a familiar route, the young man
Arrived and took his lurking woodland post.
Where the gods live above, Latona’s child
Now spoke these words of sorrow to swift Opis,
One of her sacred retinue of virgins.
“For all the good they’ll do her, my Camilla
Takes up my arms and marches to cruel war.
She is my favorite, and my love for her
Is no new charm or impulse for my soul.
Deposed through hatred of his tyranny,
Metabus left the ancient town, Privernum.
Escaping from rebellion into exile,
He took his infant daughter, called Camilla
(A small change from her mother’s name, Casmilla),
And struck out toward bleak woods along the mountains,
The child clutched in his arms. Volscian troops swarmed
On all sides, sniping at him savagely.
The Amasenus foamed beyond its banks
And trapped him—so much rain had burst the clouds.
He was prepared to swim but hesitated
In fear for his dear burden. He was forced
To make a rapid choice among his options:
In his strong hand, the warrior had a pike
Of seasoned hard oak with a mass of knots.
He wrapped his child in woodland cork-­tree bark
And deftly tied her halfway down the shaft,
Poised it in his great fist, and called to heaven:
“Latona’s pure kind daughter, forest dweller,
A father vows his child to you. It’s your spear
She holds first; at your mercy, she’s escaping.
I trust her to the risky air, so claim her!”
His arm drew back; he sent the weapon hurtling.
The water roared. Above the rapid river
Flew poor Camilla on the hissing spear.
Metabus, as the hostile band drew close,
Dove in and—triumph—plucked Diana’s gift,
His daughter, from the other grassy bank.
No walls, no homes of cities took him in—
But such a savage wouldn’t have submitted.
In lonely highlands, shepherds’ haunts, his life passed.
And there, among the thickets and the beasts’ lairs,
He milked a half-­wild brood mare from the herd
Between his daughter’s tender lips, to nurse her.
And when the baby’s steps first pressed the ground,
He placed a sharp spear in her hand and hung
A bow and quiver from her tiny shoulder.
No trailing robe and no gold snood for her:
A tiger skin was on her neck and back.
Already her soft hand flung childish weapons.
On a resistless leash she whirled a sling
To bring down a Strymonian crane or swan.
Throughout the Tuscan cities many mothers
Wanted her for their sons. She was content
With me, and longed to stay a virgin huntress,
Untouched. If she weren’t caught up in this struggle,
And so determined to harass the Trojans,
She would be with me still, a cherished comrade.
Go, since a bitter fate is tracking her,
Glide from these heights, visit the Latin country,
Where the ill-­omened ghastly fight is starting,
And take this quiver: an avenging arrow
Must claim as much blood from the soldier wounding
Her sacred body—Trojan or Italian.
I’ll take her poor corpse in a cloud, its armor
Unplundered, and entomb it in her country.”
Opis sailed lightly down through airy heaven,
Veiled in a storm cloud—but her weapons rang.
The Trojan muster now approached the walls,
With Tuscan chiefs and all the cavalry
Counted into their units. Horses pranced
And neighed and swerved and yanked resisting reins
Everywhere on the plain. An iron crop
Bristled, raised spears flamed clear across the plain.
The Latins and Messapus hurried forward;
Camilla’s wing and Coras with his brother
Appeared among them, charging, thrusting spears
Forward and back, and shaking javelins.
The men and neighing horses blazed ahead,
But stopped, a spear throw’s distance from each other,
Then raised a shout and urged their stormy horses
Into the center. Weapons poured from all sides
As thick as snow, and wove the sky in shadow.
Now fierce Aconteus raced in—Tyrrhenus met him;
They rammed their spears and were the first to fall,
With great noise, as their horses’ breasts collided,
Smashing the ribs, and like a thunderbolt
Or catapulted rock, Aconteus
Was hurled away. His soul seeped through the air.
The Latin army turned in sudden panic,
Shields on their backs, and galloped to the walls.
Asilas led the Trojan squad that chased them.
Nearing the gates, the Latins gave the war cry
Again, and turned their horses’ pliant necks.
The Trojans beat a long, free-­reined retreat.
The rocking, swelling surf makes such assaults,
Rushes to land, with foamy waves on high rocks,
Arches to flood the beach to its far edge,
Then retreats, pulling back the spinning stones
In froth; the water thins, the shore is bare.
Twice, Tuscans drove Rutulians toward the city,
And twice were forced to flee, shields at their backs.
The third encounter saw their whole front lines
Embroiled, as every man fixed on another.
Truly the dying groaned then; sunk in blood,
Weapons and bodies rolled, with half-­dead horses
Soaked in men’s gore, as bitter fighting surged.
Orsilochus stayed clear of Remulus,
But lodged his pike beneath the horse’s ear.
The beast, in rage and agony, reared high,
Lashing its forelegs while its fallen master
Writhed on the ground. Catillus took down Iollas,
Herminius next, great in his bulk and weapons
And nerve. His breast and tawny head were bare—
Fearless, he left his giant body open
And let a spear transfix his massive shoulders.
Quivering, he was doubled up in pain.
Black gore flowed everywhere. They fought, they stabbed,
They killed, and through their wounds sought splendid death.
Amazon-­like, Camilla, with her quiver
And one breast bared, reveled amid the slaughter,
Now showering a hail of pliant spears,
Now with a strong ax in her tireless fist.
Diana’s gold bow clattered on her shoulder.
Even when pressured, giving ground, pursued,
She turned around and aimed her arrows backward.
Her retinue was choice: the girls Larina,
Tarpeia, Tulla shaking her bronze ax—
Italians bright Camilla picked to serve her
Staunchly, her ornaments in peace and war:
Like Amazons who gallop in the shallows
Of Thermodon, Hippolyta’s companions
In painted armor, or like female ranks
With crescent shields who wildly whoop to praise
Penthesilea as she comes from battle.
Hard girl, who did you first unhorse, who last?
How many lay there dying from your blows?
Clytius’ son Eunaeus was the first:
Her long fir shaft impaled his naked chest.
He spewed blood, falling, gnawed the gory earth,
And writhed and curled around his wound in death.
Then she killed two, when Liris’ horse collapsed
And threw him as he grappled for the reins,
And Pagasus, bare-­handed, tried to catch him;
They fell together; then she killed Amastrus,
Hippotas’ son. Her hard-­flung shafts chased Chromis,
Tereus, Harpalycus, Demophoön.
For every dart the virgin’s hand sent hurtling,
A Phrygian died. The hunter Ornytus,
Far off, rode an Apulian mount; his armor
Was strange: for war he covered his broad shoulders
With skin ripped from a bull and kept his head safe
In a wolf ’s giant gaping mouth and white teeth.
His weapon was a country pike. He shifted
Through the squads’ center, but a head above it.
She caught him easily, amid the rout,
And spoke with hate above his skewered body:
“Tuscan, did you imagine you were hunting
In woodland? On this day a woman’s weapons
Refute your boasts. Yet it’s my spear that kills you:
You’ll take this glory to your fathers’ ghosts.”
Straight off, she killed Orsilochus and Butes,
Huge Trojans, spearing Butes from behind
On the white strip of neck that gleamed, defenseless,
While he rode, spear slung down from his left shoulder.
Chased in a broad ring by Orsilochus,
She doubled back inside it—now she chased him—
Then rose to hammer with her sturdy ax
Through armor into bone, though he kept begging
To live. The warm brains splattered on his face.
Aunus’ son, warrior from the Apennines,
A great Ligurian while his fate permitted
His tricks, now froze to find himself before her.
He knew he couldn’t turn aside the princess
Or get away, however fast his mount.
Quickly he plotted what to do and spoke:
“What’s so remarkable? A woman trusting
Her strong horse to protect her? Send him off.
Arm for a fair fight, hand to hand, on foot.
You’ll soon find out how emptily you boasted.”
Stung with the taunt, she handed off her horse
In rage, and took a bold stance, armed like him
With a foot soldier’s naked sword and plain shield.
The young man thought his trickery had worked.
Without a moment’s pause, he wheeled his horse
And sped it in retreat with iron spurs.
“Ligurian, full of nothing but yourself!
Your native cunning won’t work here and send you
Home safely to your swindling father, Aunus.”
The virgin spoke. On foot, as swift as fire,
She ran his horse down. Facing it, she seized
The reins and took his hated blood in vengeance
Easily, as a sacred falcon leaves
Its cliff to soar and chase a dove in high clouds,
Catches it tight, and guts it with hooked talons,
Till blood and torn-­out feathers fall from heaven.
The gods’ and mortals’ father, sitting throned
On high Olympus’ peak, observed with keen eyes.
The patriarch now spurred Etruscan Tarchon
To fury and the savagery of battle.
Through slaughter and collapsing lines the man rode,
With varied shouts to goad the squads. He called
Each man by name, regrouping them for battle.
“Etruscans, always useless, never shamed,
What terror grips your cringing heart today?
A woman drives our ranks in rout and chaos.
Don’t you know what to do with swords and spears?
For love and your campaigns at night, you’re eager,
For dances Bacchus’ curving flute announces.
The tables will be rich with food and wine
(Your guiding passion) when an augur sanctions
Victory rites, and a greasy offering calls you
To the tall groves.” He wheeled, spurred toward the center,
Prepared to die. He plunged at Venulus
And tore him from his horse, clasped his opponent
With all his strength, and sped away. A shout
Rose to the sky, and all the Latins watched:
Tarchon blazed down the broad field with his captive,
Weapons and all; he snapped the spearhead off
And groped for some unguarded place to thrust it
Lethally. Venulus fought back and blocked
Stabs to his throat. Strength against strength, they grappled.
A tawny eagle soaring with a snake
Snatched from the ground and fastened in its claws—
In twisting coils, the wounded creature flails,
Raises its spiky scales and rears its head,
Hissing; its captor gouges at these struggles
With a hooked beak, while beating through the sky’s heights:
So Tarchon fetched his prize from Tibur’s lines,
Elated. When his Tuscans saw this exploit,
They charged. Fate’s hand had come to rest on Arruns.
Craftily he kept circling swift Camilla,
Clutching his spear and looking for his chance.
Wherever in the fighting’s midst the girl raged,
Arruns came after, softly tracking her.
Where she beat down opponents and withdrew,
The young man slyly turned his horse to follow.
He tested this and that way all around,
Shaking his deadly spear, unstoppable.
Cybele’s votary and former priest,
Cloreus, stood out bright in Phrygian armor.
He spurred a foam-­mouthed horse whose leather trappings
Had bronze scales linked by gold in feather patterns.
He wore exotic red and splendid purple
And shouldered a gold Lycian bow, with arrows
From Sicily. The helmet of the priest
Was gold, a gold brooch caught his linen cloak
In rustling saffron folds. Embroidery
Covered his tunic and barbarian leggings.
The huntress, longing to nail Trojan weapons
On a shrine’s door or wear proud captive gold,
Picked the man out of all that strife and tracked him
Blindly and recklessly across the phalanx—
On fire with a woman’s love of plunder.
This was when Arruns saw a chance to trap her
At last. He raised his spear and prayed to heaven:
“Holy Soracte’s keeper, great Apollo,
Tuscans revere you most: our heaps of pine logs
Feed your fire; we go barefoot through the flames
And deep coals, trusting in our piety.
Almighty father, let my weapon cancel
Our army’s shame. I want no arms, no trophy—
No spoils at all. I’ll get my glory elsewhere.
I’d strike this noxious bitch down and return,
Gladly obscure, back to my homeland’s cities.”
Apollo heard. Part of the prayer he granted;
The rest he scattered to the fluttering breeze.
He let him kill Camilla in an ambush,
But not return again to his proud nation—
That plea went gusting to the southern gales,
So when the spear he launched snapped through the air,
The Volscians, all avidly alerted,
Looked toward their princess. But she didn’t notice
The air, the sound, the weapon from the sky,
Until it found its goal beneath her bared breast,
Drove deep, and lodged, and drank her virgin blood.
She fell; dismayed, her retinue ran in
To hold her up. Arrun’s alarm was greatest:
Fear marred his joy. He fled, no longer willing
To trust his spear or meet the young girl’s weapons—
As, far ahead of hateful armed pursuers,
A wolf slinks quickly off to trackless heights;
He knows how rash he was to kill a shepherd
Or bulky ox; between his legs his tail shakes
And strokes his belly as he seeks the woods:
So Arruns in his terror slunk from view,
And merged into the ranks, content with safety.
Dying, she yanked the spear: the iron point
Was wedged deep in the wound, between her ribs.
She bled, she slumped down, and her eyes were closing
In death’s chill. From her face the blush was gone.
Breathing her last, she singled Acca out
And spoke to her—this was the most devoted
Comrade she had, and her sole confidant.
“Sister, my strength is gone. This bitter wound
Has finished me, and everything grows dark.
Make your escape—take Turnus this last message:
‘Step in, and keep the Trojans from the city.’
And now good-­bye.” The reins had dropped. She tumbled
To earth and was released from her cold body
Slowly. She bent her head and laid it down,
Conquered by death, and let her weapons go.
An angry groan—her life fled to the shades.
Then an immense shout rose and struck the gold stars.
After her fall, the fight grew raw. The whole force
Of Trojans, Tuscan chiefs, Evander’s horsemen
Out of Arcadia stormed into one mass.
Opis, Diana’s spy, had sat a long time
And watched the battle from a mountaintop.
But when, among the far-­off shouting frenzy
Of troops, a ruthless death brought down Camilla,
She groaned and spoke from deep within her heart:
“This is too hard a punishment, poor girl,
For your attempt to harry Teucrians!
You served Diana in the lonely thickets,
Our quiver on your shoulder—what good now?
But even at the end your queen won’t leave you
Unhonored. All the world will praise your death
And know you didn’t shamefully lack vengeance.
Whoever gave you that outrageous wound
Should die—and will.” Below the mountain, shadowed
By holm oaks, was Dercennus’ tomb, a huge mound.
(In ancient times he’d been Laurentum’s king.)
Swiftly and gracefully, the goddess leapt there,
And stood and gazed at Arruns from on high.
His armor glinted, and he swelled with swagger.
“Why do you turn and go? Come over here,
And get the prize Camilla’s death has earned you.
But are you worth an arrow of Diana?”
The Thracian goddess took a speedy shaft
From her gold quiver. Full of rage, she drew
The bow out till its curving ends converged.
Her right hand on the string against her breast
And, at the iron point, her left were level.
In one short moment Arruns heard the sizzle
Of the dart’s flight and felt its iron lodge.
His comrades didn’t notice, and they left him
Groaning his last breaths on the dusty plain.
Opis flew off to heavenly Olympus.
Camilla’s light-­armed squadron fell back first,
Rutulians next, with keen Atinas, routed.
The leaders scattered from their regiments;
Everyone galloped toward the walls and safety.
Nobody could hold out against the onrush
Of deadly Trojan arms, no one could fight them,
But threw their unstrung bows on weary shoulders,
And hoofbeats’ rhythms shook the soft-­earthed plain.
Black dust rolled toward the walls, a murky tumult.
Mothers on lookout towers beat their breasts
And raised a female cry clear to the stars.
The enemy swarmed in among them, hounding
Those who first rushed the open gates. Their threshold
Became a sorry death trap. With their snug homes
And nation’s walls around, they choked out life,
Impaled. Some closed the gate—they didn’t dare
Let pleading comrades in. Now there was carnage
Of those who slashed and stabbed to block the portal
And those stampeding in against their weapons.
Their weeping parents watched some locked-­out soldiers,
Shoved by the rout, roll headlong into ditches,
Or spur and slack their reins to batter blindly
At those unyielding barriers, the gates.
The very mothers on the walls, who’d witnessed
Camilla’s love of country, tried to match her.
In their alarm, they hurled down posts of oak wood
And stakes singed hard in place of iron weapons.
They longed to die first in the town’s defense.
Acca found Turnus in the woods and gave him
The brutal news of that tremendous havoc:
The Volscian lines smashed, and Camilla fallen,
Enemies sweeping with rapacious triumph,
Unstoppable, a rout that reached the walls.
In rage (and by Jove’s hard will), he deserted
His station in the close-­grown upland forest.
Just when he’d left his lookout for the plains,
Father Aeneas reached the unwatched pass,
Emerged from the dark woods and crossed the ridge.
Both hurried toward the town with all their forces—
And no long measure of a gap between them.
Aeneas spotted the Laurentian columns
Down the dust-­smoking plain, and right then Turnus,
Hearing the tramp of feet and snort of horses,
Recognized fierce Aeneas under arms.
They would have made an instant trial of battle,
But ruddy Phoebus plunged his weary team
Into the Spanish sea, day slipped to night.
They camped before the town, constructing ramparts.
