All-­powerful Olympus’ hall now opened.
The sire of gods and king of men had called
A conclave to his starry home, steep lookout
Onto the world, the Trojan camp, the Latins.
In a hall open on both sides, the gods sat.
“Sky dwellers,” he began, “what made your purpose
Turn backward into vicious rivalry?
I forbade Italy to clash with Troy.
Why this rebellious strife? What terror drives
Each side to swarm for arms and rouse the other?
The time will come for battle. Don’t invoke it.
Wild Carthage will one day send devastation
Through shattered Alps against the Roman walls.
Then you can have your hateful fight, your pillage.
Leave off, content: confirm the pact I sanctioned.”
Brief words—but golden Venus gave an answer
That wasn’t brief.
“Father, mankind’s—all things’—eternal ruler
(What greater being is there to appeal to?),
You see how the Rutulians gloat and Turnus
Drives through the ranks, a striking presence, scornful
In his success. Without the aid of closed walls,
The Teucrians must fight within their gates,

2–­The sire of gods and king of men:
Jupiter.
3–­A conclave: Councils of the gods
are a standard feature in Greco-­Roman
epic.

5

10

15

20

12–­Carthage will one day send dev­
astation: A reference to the Second Punic
War; see 4.386n.

. 256 .

BOOK 10
Within their earthworks, filling moats with blood;
Aeneas is far off and unaware.
When will you let these sieges end? A new force
Looms at Troy’s walls and stifles her rebirth.
Tydeus’ son—now from Aetolian Arpi—
Assails them. Once again I will be wounded:
Weapons of mortals wait for me, your child.
If Trojans came without your holy sanction
To Italy, don’t help, but punish them.
But if so many oracles, from gods
And the dead, brought them, how can anyone
Turn your commands aside, ordain new fate?
Why mention ships burned by the shore at Eryx,
Or crazed gales the Aeolian king of storms
Stirred up, or Iris shunted through the clouds?
Now she incites creation’s only part
Still left in peace, the demons, thrusts Allecto
Up to the light, to rave through Italy’s towns.
Now I don’t mind about the empire hoped for
In luckier times. Let those you favor win.
No lands for Teucrians? Your wife’s too bitter?
I beg, then, by Troy’s smoking ruins, father:
Let me discharge Ascanius from war,
Unharmed. Please let my grandson live. Aeneas
Can toss on foreign seas, for all I care:
Whatever road fate grants him, let him follow,
28–29–­Tydeus’ son . . . Once again
I will be wounded: Tydeus’ son is Diomedes, who wounded Venus when
she intervened to save Aeneas at Troy
(Iliad 5); he now resides in Italy (8.9–
17).
36–38–­
ships burned . . . crazed
gales . . . Iris: Juno has orchestrated the
storm that stranded the Trojans at Carthage (1.50–119), and she has used Iris

25

30

35

40

45

to initiate the burning of the Trojan fleet
(5.605–63) and to rouse Turnus (9.1–
22).
39–­creation’s only part: The cosmos
was traditionally divided into heaven,
earth and sea, and the Underworld.
Venus claims Juno has already brought
war to the first two and is now disturbing the third.
40–­Allecto: One of the three Furies.

. 257 .

BOOK 10
But let me take his son from ruthless battle.
I own Amathus, Cythera, high Paphus,
The Cyprus shrine. Let him grow old with me,
Unarmed, inglorious. Command that Carthage
Trample and tyrannize Ausonia.
Nothing from us will stop it. Has it helped him
To live through that cursed war, escape the Greek fires,
Take endless risks at sea and on bleak land,
In search of Latium and a reborn Troy?
They should have settled on their homeland’s ashes,
On Troy’s site. Give the wretched Trojans back
Xanthus, Simoïs, the entire round
Of Ilium’s rise and fall.” Then queenly Juno
Spoke in her rage: “Why shatter my deep silence
And bring my hidden grief to public words?
Has any god or human forced Aeneas
Into Latinus’ kingdom? Granted, fate—
Or else Cassandra’s ravings—led him there:
I certainly was not the one to urge him
Out of his camp and into risky winds,
Leaving the walls and army to a boy,
To roil the Tuscans and those peaceful tribes.
What god, what tyranny of mine propelled him?
Juno did this? Or Iris, sent from clouds?
‘How wrong to ring this infant Troy with flames!’
Divine Venilia’s son, Pilumnus’ grandson
Turnus can’t get a foothold in his own land!
And Trojans putting Latium to the torch?
And farms usurped and looted? In-­laws chosen

51–­Amathus, Cythera, high Paphus:
Locations of sanctuaries of Venus.
67– ­Cassandra’s ravings: Cassandra
told Anchises that the Trojans would
settle in Italy: see 3.183–87.

50

55

60

65

70

75

70–­a boy: Ascanius, left in charge by
Aeneas despite his young years.

. 258 .

BOOK 10
At will, girls torn from promised husbands’ arms?
Hands clasped in peace—and weapons studding prows?
You stole Aeneas from the hands of Greeks
And left them only mist and empty breezes.
Out of the ships you made a fleet of nymphs.
Helping Rutulians is a crime for me?
Aeneas gone and unaware—so be it.
Paphus, Idalium, Cythera are yours;
Why meddle with this tough, war-­pregnant city?
Did I attempt to topple shaky Troy?
I—or the man who threw the wretched people
In the Greeks’ way? What made two continents
Rise up in arms? Why were their oaths betrayed?
Did I send out the Trojan lover-­boy
Who raided Sparta? Did I furnish weapons?
Feed war with lust? The time to fear was then!
It’s late for petty wrangles and complaints.”
This was the plea of Juno. All the gods
Murmured their different thoughts, as forests murmur,
Catching the first gusts, whisking hidden rustlings,
Speaking to sailors of the storm to come.
Then the almighty father, the world’s ruler,
Began. For him the gods’ high hall grew silent;
The deep earth shook, the towering sky was still,
The West Winds settled, oceans calmed their waves.
“Hear what I say and fix it in your hearts.
A league of the Ausonians and Trojans
Was not allowed, nor can your quarrel end.
To no one’s luck today, to no one’s hope

81–­You stole Aeneas from the hands
of Greeks: See 10.28–29n.
83–­a fleet of nymphs: It was Cybele,
not Venus, who transformed the ships
(9.77–122).

80

85

90

95

100

105

89–­the man who threw: Paris. Juno
attributes the Trojan War—and thus
Aeneas’s troubles—to Venus’s support in
his abduction of Helen.

. 259 .

BOOK 10
Will I show favor—Trojan or Rutulian.
If it’s Italian fate, or Trojan folly,
Or false advice behind this siege, no matter.
Everyone—the Rutulians too—will earn
Triumph or pain: King Jupiter is neutral.
The fates will find their way.” He nodded, swearing
By Styx, his brother’s river—pitch-­seared banks
And dark gulf. At his nod Olympus shook.
No more was said. He rose from his gold throne.
Gods drew around and led him to the door.
Meanwhile the slaughtering Rutulians thronged
At every gate and ringed the walls with flames.
The Trojan band could not escape their fort.
They stood pathetic, helpless, and quite hopeless
On towers or thinly topped the ring of ramparts.
In the front line were Hicetaon’s son
Thymoetes; and Imbrasus’ Asius;
Old Thymbris; Castor; next, Sarpedon’s brothers
Clarus and Thaemon, from proud Lycia.
Huge as his father, Clytius, or his brother
Menestheus, Lyrnessan Acmon strained
Hugely to haul no small part of a mountain.
They fought with spears or rocks in their defense.
Fire was thrown and arrows set to bowstrings.
And in the midst was Venus’ rightful darling,
The Trojan boy, who’d left his lovely head bare.
He gleamed like gems in tawny gold, which make
A head or neck resplendent, or like ivory
Set by skill in Orician terebinth
Or boxwood. On his milky neck cascaded
113–14–­
He nodded, swearing by
Styx: Oaths sworn by the river Styx were
considered inviolable.

. 260 .

133–­The Trojan boy: Ascanius.

110

115

120

125

130

135

BOOK 10
Long hair beneath a pliant band of gold.
The brave tribes saw you there too, Ismarus,
Guiding your poisoned shafts to bloodshed. Strong men
Work in your noble Lydian clan’s fields
That the Pactolus, gold-­dust river, waters.
Mnestheus was there too, still exulting
From driving Turnus from the earthwork walls;
And Capys—the Campanian town is named
For him. So these men met in hard war’s clashes.
That night Aeneas cut the channel’s waters.
Leaving Evander, he approached the king
In the Etruscan camp, told who he was,
His strengths, his needs, the savage heart of Turnus,
The allies that Mezentius was gaining.
He warned how risky human projects are,
But mingled pleas with all this; straight off, Tarchon
Joined with him in a pact. The Lydian race
Embarked beneath a foreign captain, paying
Fate’s debt, and by the gods’ command. Aeneas
Led with his ship. Its beak showed Phrygian lions
Below Mount Ida—dear to Trojan exiles.
The mighty hero sat there and considered
How the war might end. Pallas, at his left,
Asked about stars, the guides of that dim voyage,
And all the leader’s trials on land and sea.
Goddesses, open Helicon, recite
What forces fitted vessels out and followed
Aeneas from Etruscan shores by sea.
142–­Pactolus: The gold-­
producing
river where King Midas washed away his
“golden touch.”
148–­the king: Tarchon, commander
of the Etruscans.
154–­The Lydian race: The Etruscans
were believed to come from Lydia.

140

145

150

155

160

165

163–214–­Vergil’s catalogue of ships
supplied by Etruscan allies is inspired by
Iliad 2.
163–­Goddesses, open Helicon: The
Muses of Mount Helicon; see 7.641n.

. 261 .

BOOK 10
The armored Tigress of King Massicus
Sliced the waves. In his charge a thousand young men
Left Cosae and walled Clusium, deadly bows
And arrows in light quivers on their shoulders.
Fierce Abas’s whole force wore resplendent arms.
A gold Apollo glittered on his prow.
His native Populonia had yielded
Six hundred battle-­hardened youths; from Ilva
(With endless iron mines) three hundred more marched.
Next came Asilas, who brought prophecy
From gods to men. The stars, the guts of beasts,
The tongues of birds, the prescient lightning served him.
He swept with him a thousand bristling spears.
Pisa, Alphaean town on Tuscan land,
Had placed them at his service. Lovely Astyr
Followed, trusting his horse and rainbow armor.
The Caeretans and farmers by the Minio,
Old Pyrgi and Graviscae, which breeds sickness,
Sent three more hundred, equally devoted.
Heroic leader of Ligurians,
I won’t omit you, Cunarus, or you,
Cupavo, with few men; your swan-­plumed crest
Spoke of your father’s transformation—Love’s fault.
Cycnus, they say, mourned his dear Phaethon
In leafy shade of poplars, the boy’s sisters.
He sang because it soothed his bitter longing,
And grew soft feathers, white like old men’s hair,
168– ­Cosae:–­A city on the coast,
more usually called Cosa.
168–­Clusium:–­A city near Lake Tra­
simene.
179–­Pisa, Alphaean town: Modern
Pisa, founded by settlers from Pisa in
Greece, near the river Alpheus.

170

175

180

185

190

185–­Ligurians: Liguria is a coastal
region of northwestern Italy, coinciding
with the Italian Riviera.
189– ­Cycnus: Cycnus’s lover Phaethon, child of the sun god Helios, was
killed driving his father’s solar chariot.
The mourning Cycnus was transformed
into a swan.

. 262 .

BOOK 10
And left the ground, calling and chasing stars.
His son now led the fleet, with troops his own age.
Its oars heaved his enormous Centaur forward;
The figurehead, hefting a boulder, menaced
The waves; the long keel furrowed the deep water.
The father’s banks gave troops to Ocnus, Manto
The seer’s and the Tuscan river’s son.
He founded Mantua, named for his mother—
Mantua rich in different lineages:
Three races and four clans in each, but this
Is the chief town, with strength from Tuscan stock.
Mezentius drew five hundred more to fight:
Mincius River, veiled in blue reeds, brought them
Seaward from Lake Benacus in a warship.
Stalwart Aulestes’ hundred oarsmen surged
To beat the water, turning calm to froth
Round the huge Triton figurehead that blasted
On a blue conch and terrified the straits;
His shaggy torso human to the waist,
Below, a whale. Waves roared and foamed beneath him.
These chosen princes sailed in thirty ships
To Troy’s aid. Bronze prows cut the briny plain.
Day had retreated from the sky. Kind Phoebe
Drove her night horses tramping through high heaven.
Aeneas (wakeful in anxiety)
Trimmed the sails or sat, steering, at the tiller.
Suddenly in midcourse a band of comrades
Appeared; the ships that kindly Cybele
200–­Mantua: Vergil’s hometown,
named for Manto, daughter of the famous seer Tiresias.
204–­Mezentius drew: Because of
their hatred for him.

195

200

205

210

215

220

206–­Lake Benacus: Now Lake
Garda, in northern Italy.
215–­Phoebe: Another name (meaning “shining”) for the moon goddess.
220–­the ships that kindly Cybele:
See 10.83n.

. 263 .

BOOK 10
Had changed to nymphs, goddesses of the sea—
One for each bronze beak that had stood on shore.
They swam along with him and sliced the waves.
Far off, they’d known their king; they danced around him.
Cymodocea, the most eloquent,
Came up behind, her right hand on the stern,
Her left hand softly paddling, breasts emerging.
He didn’t know her. “Child of gods, Aeneas,
Are you awake? Then let the sails’ rope go.
We are your fleet, pines from the holy heights
Of Ida—sea nymphs now. With sword and flame
The treacherous Rutulian hounded us.
We had to break your chains and seek you here.
The Mother pitied us, transformed us, sent us
To live a blessed life beneath the water.
The walls and moat imprison your young son
Among fierce Latins and their bristling spears.
Arcadian horsemen hold their posts, brave Tuscans
Along with them. But Turnus with his squadrons
Blocks them, resolved to keep your camps apart.
Rise up! Call your confederates to arms
At first dawn. Take the shield the god of fire
Has ringed with gold and made invincible.
Tomorrow’s light—if you will trust my words—
Will see great heaps of the Rutulian dead.”
She spoke and dove away, but first pushed deftly
At the high hull, which ran on through the waves
More swiftly than a spear or wind-­quick arrow,
And the rest sped behind. Anchises’ son,
The Trojan, stunned, then joyful, turned his gaze
To the sky’s arch and prayed, “Idaean Mother
Of gods, devoted to Mount Dindymus,
252–­Mount Dindymus: A Phrygian
mountain sacred to Cybele.

. 264 .

225

230

235

240

245

250

BOOK 10
Tower-­crowned towns, and chariot-­yoked lions:
Lead me in war, achieve your prophecy,
March with the Phrygians, bringing them good fortune.”
The day, in its swift circle, had returned;
The ripe sun routed nighttime as he spoke.
He called his troops to arms: they must await
His signal, with their hearts prepared for war.
Now he could see the Trojans and their camp
From the high stern. He raised the flaring shield
On his left arm. His people on the walls
Shouted up to the sky—hope spurred their rage—
And threw their spears with force, like cranes from Strymon
Who skim the upper air beneath black clouds,
Fleeing the South Winds with loud, cheerful calls.
The king and lords of Italy were stunned
To see the vessels turning toward the shore.
The sea became a fleet that flooded in.
A flame poured from Aeneas’ feathered crest;
The gold boss on his shield was spewing fire,
As when a clear night brings the deathly glow
Of bleeding comets, or the Dog Star rises,
Burning with drought and sickness for weak mortals,
And spreads malignant light across the sky.
But Turnus didn’t lose his nerve—he’d do it:
Get to the shore in time, beat back the landing—
First heartening his troops, or baiting them:
“Now you can smash them, as you’ve yearned to do.
253–­Tower-­crowned . . . lions: Cybele is depicted wearing a turret crown
and driving a chariot pulled by lions.
264–­Strymon: Cranes were believed
to winter at the river Strymon in Thrace.
270–­A flame poured from Aeneas’
feathered crest: Echoes a famous image
of Achilles from Iliad 18.

255

260

265

270

275

273–­Dog Star: Sirius, whose rising
was associated in antiquity with drought,
famine, and madness.
278–­The line is thought to be spurious.

. 265 .

BOOK 10
Courage controls the god of war. Remember
Your wives and homes. Remake your fathers’ fame
And heroism. Hurry to the surf
And catch the sailors staggering and fearful.
Fortune helps bold men.”
Still speaking, he considered which to lead
On this attack, and which should keep the siege.
Aeneas sent his comrades down the gangplanks
From the high sterns. Most watched the ebbing sea
And made a cautious leap into the shallows.
Some climbed down oars. Now Tarchon spied a place
Where no waves broke and boomed to mark the shallows,
But untouched sea washed, with a gentle swell.
He turned his prow there and implored his troops:
“My chosen company, drive on your oars,
Hurl your ships forward—each hull’s beak will split
The hostile land apart, each plow a furrow.
I wouldn’t shrink from breaking on that berth
The moment I seize land.” His comrades heard
And surged against the oars and brought the boats
Through frothing water onto Latin soil.
Now every hull had settled without harm,
Gripping the dry sand—all except for Tarchon’s.
On a projecting sandbank in the shallows
It hung and teetered and withstood the waves—
Then shattered, pouring men into the surf
To fight the benches and the splintered oars
And the hard undertow that caught their feet.
Instantly, zealous Turnus took his whole force
To stand and face the Trojans on the shore.
The signal blared. Aeneas charged first, cutting

284–­Fortune helps bold men: A Latin
proverb incorporated here by Vergil.

. 266 .

280

285

290

295

300

305

310

BOOK 10
The rustic ranks of Latins down—an omen
Of how the fight would end. He killed huge Theron,
Who first came at him. Bronze joints, gold scales yielded,
And the sword pierced his side and drank his blood.
He wounded Lichas, sacred to Apollo:
Cut from his lifeless mother yet surviving
The knife himself. Aeneas hurled to death
Huge Gyas and tough Cisseus, who mowed
The lines. No use their clubs from Hercules,
No use their strong hands or their sire, Melampus,
Hercules’ friend in all his stringent tasks
On earth. The hero hurled a javelin
Through Pharus’ shouting, boasting, coward mouth.
And you, poor Cydon, there for Clytius,
Your latest love, with blond down on his cheeks,
Would have been brought down by a Trojan hand
That turned all passion for young men to nothing,
Had Phorcus’ seven sons, your troop of brothers,
Not hedged you closely, throwing seven spears,
Some to bounce from Aeneas’ shield and helmet,
Others to graze him, when kind Venus turned them.
But now Aeneas spoke to staunch Achates:
“Give me the weapons planted in Greek bodies
At Troy. Not one I hurl at the Rutulians
Will go to waste.” He snatched a giant spear
And threw it. Macon’s bronze shield was transfixed—
His breastplate and the breast behind it shattered:
Alcanor caught his brother, as he fell,
With his right arm—through which the hero’s lance
Continued unimpeded, soaked in blood.

315–16–­sacred to Apollo: cut from
his lifeless mother: Babies born by Caesarian section were dedicated to Apollo,
god of medicine.

. 267 .

315

320

325

330

335

340

BOOK 10
His own dead hand now hung by scanty sinews.
Numitor snatched the spear that killed his brother
And aimed it at Aeneas, but to lodge it
Was not his fate. He grazed Achates’ thigh.
Clausus from Cures, young and strong and bold,
Launched a stiff spear at Dryops, who was speaking.
It drove beneath his chin and pierced his throat:
His words and life both ended in one moment.
His forehead hit the earth, in thick spewed gore.
Three youths from Boreas’ high clan in Thrace
And the three sons Ismaran Idas sent
Fell under different wounds. Halaesus led
Auruncans in a charge. The son of Neptune,
Messapus, followed with fine horses: all blocked
The landing, struggling on the very threshold
Of Italy. As winds across the vast sky
With equal strength and courage meet in battle,
A stalemate of themselves, the clouds, the sea,
The world a standoff and the end unknown—
So were the Trojans and the Latins, clashing,
Foot locked with foot, hands grappling man to man.
Elsewhere a rushing stream had rolled down boulders
And scattered them with trees ripped from its banks.
Here on this torn-­up ground Arcadians
Had left their horses, but they weren’t accustomed
To charging as a line of infantry.
When Pallas saw the Latins routing them,
He pleaded and harangued in desperation:
“Where are you running, friends? By your brave acts
And selves, by King Evander and his triumphs,

345–­Clausus from Cures: An ancestor of the powerful Claudian family, one
branch of the Julio-­
Claudian dynasty
that produced several emperors.

345

350

355

360

365

370

350–­Boreas: The North Wind, believed to originate in the mountains of
Thrace.

. 268 .

BOOK 10
And by my hope of winning fame like his:
Your swords must cut a path through your opponents.
Your feet are useless! Our great country calls
Both you and me to meet the thickest onslaught.
These are not gods but men attacking men,
An equal count of mortal hands and souls.
Shall we go back—or to the Trojan camp?”
He pierced the center of the densest ranks.
Lagus was in his way first—evil luck
Set him there: tugging at a giant boulder,
When a spear hurtled, striking where ribs branch
Out from the spine. Now Pallas bent to yank
The shaft free, just as Hispo made a lunge
In reckless fury at his friend’s cruel death.
Pallas was quick to put a stop to him,
Driving a sword deep in his panting lung.
He turned to Sthenius, then Anchemolus
Of Rhoetus’ ancient race, who’d violated—
Rash crime—the bedroom of his father’s wife.
Twins also fell in those Rutulian fields—
You, Daucus’ sons, Thymber and Larides,
Whose likeness baffled and amused your parents.
Evander’s child gave them a brutal difference
By slicing Thymber’s head off with a sword,
Then Larides’ right hand—it twitched back toward him,
The dying fingers clutching at the sword.
Their angry shame at Pallas’ taunts and triumph
Heated and armed Arcadians for battle.
Rhoeteus drove past, making his escape:
The youth impaled him; Ilus was reprieved
(For a short time)—the spear was aimed at him,
378–­
He pierced the center of the
densest ranks: The beginning of Pallas’ aristeia, a conventional scene in epic

375

380

385

390

395

400

poetry in which a hero displays excellence in combat.

. 269 .

BOOK 10
But Rhoeteus took it, while you noble brothers,
Teuthras and Tyres, chased him. Out he rolled
And beat Rutulian ground with numbing heels.
When summer winds he’s prayed for start to rise,
A shepherd scatters fires around the woods;
The gaps catch suddenly: a battle line
Of fierce unbroken burning spans the country:
The victor sits and eyes victorious flames.
Likewise the courage of uniting troops
Seconded Pallas. But war-­keen Halaesus
Went forward under cover of his shield.
He slaughtered Ladon, Pheres, Demodocus.
Strymonius reached for his throat; a bright blade
Lopped his hand; then a rock smashed Thoas’ face:
Gory brains, skull chips flew. His seer father
Had hid the child Halaesus in the woods,
But when death lulled the white-­haired old man’s eyes,
The Fates could claim the child, a sacrifice
To weapons of Evander. Pallas now prayed,
“Make this throw lucky, Father Tiber, piercing
Halaesus’ strong breast, and your sacred oak
Will have his arms and armor.” The god heard him,
And the Arcadian spear found poor Halaesus’
Exposed chest, as it shielded Imaon.
Lausus, a great force here, did not desert
The slaughter-­panicked ranks. He first killed Abas,
The mainstay of the fight, who came at him.
Arcadia’s children fell, Etruscans fell,
And Trojans whom the Greeks had left alive;
Leaders and brawn were equal in the clash.
The rearguard pushed the front line to a mass
Of hampered weapons. Pallas drove his own men,
And Lausus his—the youths were beautiful
426–­Lausus: The son of Mezentius.

. 270 .

405

410

415

420

425

430

BOOK 10
And close in age. Homecoming was denied
To both by fate. But high Olympus’ king
Would not consent for them to face each other.
Their doom would come from greater enemies.
Meanwhile the kind nymph sent her brother Turnus
To Lausus’ aid. He sped his chariot
Through the line, telling comrades, “Now stand down.
Pallas belongs to me—I’ll go for him.
I only wish his father could look on.”
He spoke. His comrades quit the field as ordered.
With the Rutulians gone, the youth, transfixed
By the sneered order, let his hard gaze rove
Up and down Turnus’ huge form from a distance.
He gave this answer to the tyrant’s words:
“Either brings praise: the warlord’s arms or glory
In death—it makes no difference to my father.
So stop your threats.” He stepped into the open,
Freezing the blood in the Arcadians’ hearts.
Turnus jumped down, and now on foot he moved
Close in. A lion on his lofty post
Sees a bull lunging on a distant plain
And hurtles toward him: Turnus looked like this.
Pallas first gauged his spear’s range, then stepped forward,
On the huge sky he called, in hope that chance
Would bless his bravery against the odds.
“Hercules, come—my father took you in,
A stranger—help in this great enterprise.
Let dying Turnus see his bloody weapons
435–36–­
Homecoming was denied
to both by fate: Lausus will be killed by
Aeneas, Pallas by Turnus.
439–­kind nymph: Juturna, deified
after she was raped by Jupiter.
443–­his father: Evander, one of
Aeneas’ primary Italian allies.

435

440

445

450

455

460

460–­Hercules: The people of Pallanteum (sometimes called Arcadians by
Vergil) had a special relationship with
Hercules, having adopted his cult after
he saved them from the monster Cacus,
as narrated by Evander at 8.185–275.

. 271 .

BOOK 10
Taken from him by these hands, once they’ve won.”
The god heard, but he stifled heavy groans
Within; the tears were futile that he shed.
To comfort him, his father, Jupiter,
Said this: “An end is set for everyone,
For life is brief and cannot be recovered.
But brave men, through their exploits, strive for fame
That lasts. Beneath Troy’s high walls many sons
Of gods died. My own child Sarpedon died there.
Fate calls: for Turnus too the race is ending.”
He turned his eyes from the Italian fields.
Pallas with all his great strength cast his spear
And snatched his bright sword from the hollow sheath.
The spear flew, pierced the layers of the shield,
And struck the breastplate at the shoulder’s rim,
Finally grazing Turnus’s massive form.
But he in turn deliberately aimed
His iron-­pointed pike and launched it, saying,
“See if my weapon is the one to stick.”
The spearhead, striking, shaking, pounded through
The shield—all of the bronze and iron sheets,
All of the bull’s-­hide layers wrapping it—
Into the breastplate, into that strong chest.
Out of the wound he tore the heated shaft,
But with it came the lifeblood and the soul.
Collapsing forward with a clash of arms,
He touched the hostile soil with blood-­daubed lips.
Turnus stood over him:
“Go tell Evander this, Arcadians:
I send him back the Pallas he deserves.
471–­Sarpedon: A Trojan son of Jupi­
ter. Jupiter reluctantly allowed him to be
killed by Patroclus at Troy (Iliad 16).

. 272 .

465

470

475

480

485

490

BOOK 10
The soothing tribute of a burial
I grant him. But he had a costly guest—
Aeneas.” With his foot he held the corpse down
And stripped the giant sword belt with the story
Of crime etched in—a wedding night that left
The bedrooms smeared with gore of slaughtered youths—
That Eurytus’ son Clonus had embossed
In gold, and Turnus now was thrilled to loot.
People know nothing of their fated future.
Their exaltation cannot stay in bounds.
The time would come when he’d give anything
Not to have touched the boy. He’d hate his plunder,
And hate this day. Pallas’ friends pressed in, wailing.
They laid him on his shield to haul away.
What grief, what glory will you take your father!
A single day brought war and death to you.
But you leave mountains of Rutulian corpses!
Not a mere rumor of disaster came
To Aeneas, but a trusty runner, pleading
For him to pull his comrades from death’s edge.
He reaped his furious way and made a broad path
To Turnus as he triumphed in fresh slaughter.
Aeneas as he ran kept seeing Pallas,
Evander, and their banquet for the stranger,
Their hands’ clasp. Now he seized the four young sons
Of Sulmo, then the four brought up by Ufens:
They were reprieved to serve as sacrifices
To ghosts: their captive blood would soak the pyre.
496–97–­the giant sword belt . . .
the story of crime: Pallas’ sword belt is
decorated with the myth of the Danaids,
the fifty daughters of Danaus who killed
their husbands on their wedding night.

495

500

505

510

515

520

504–­
He’d hate his plunder: The
sight of Pallas’s belt will drive Aeneas to
slay Turnus: 12.941–49.
519–­to serve as sacrifices: Achilles
did the same at the death of his companion Patroclus (Iliad 21).

. 273 .

BOOK 10
Ferociously, he cast a spear at Magus,
Who nimbly ducked—it passed above him, trembling.
He grasped Aeneas’ knees, entreating him,
“By your ancestral spirits and your hopes
For Iulus, spare me for my child and father.
Fine embossed silver by the hundredweight
Lies buried in my high house—pounds of gold too,
Worked and unworked. The Trojans still can win:
What difference is there in a single life?”
Aeneas gave this answer to his pleas:
“Let your sons have so many pounds of silver
And gold, since Turnus did away with bargains
In war the moment that he slaughtered Pallas.
My father’s ghost agrees, and so does Iulus.”
He seized the helmet, wrenching back the neck,
And stabbed him as he begged, up to the hilt.
Not far off was Haemonides, the priest
Of Apollo and Diana, in a headband
And fillets, radiant white robes, and emblems.
Aeneas chased him down and, looming darkly,
Sacrificed him. Serestus hauled the weapons
Away, a trophy for King Mars the Strider.
Caeculus, born of Vulcan’s line, and Umbro,
From Marsian mountains, rallied the Italians.
Aeneas stormed against them. With his sword
He lopped off Anxur’s hand—the round shield fell.
He’d shouted out some self-­deceiving boast.
Perhaps he dreamed about immortal fame,
Or reassured himself of gray old age.
Tarquitus, son of Dryope the nymph
537–­
Haemonides, the priest: Not
mentioned elsewhere.

525

530

535

540

545

550

542–­
King Mars the Strider: The
Latin epithet Gradivus is cognate with
gradior, “step.”

. 274 .

BOOK 10
And sylvan Faunus, strode with his bright weapons
Into Aeneas’ rage. He drew the spear back
And made the massive shield and breastplate useless.
The head was slung to earth before it finished
Its pleading, the warm body was kicked over,
And from his hardened heart Aeneas spoke:
“Lie there, you menace, so the best of mothers
Can’t hide your corpse beneath your father’s tomb.
You will be left for crows, or waves will sweep you
Beneath, where hungry fish will gulp your wounds.”
He turned to chasing Turnus’ vanguard: Lucas,
Antaeus, hearty Numa, fair-­haired Camers—
Son of brave Volcens, richest of Italians
In land, and lord of quiet Amyclae.
Just like Aegaeon’s hundred hands and arms,
His fifty fire-­belching chests and mouths,
When (in the story) fifty clanking shields
And fifty drawn swords fought Jove’s thunderbolts,
Aeneas swept the plain in savage triumph
Once blood was on his sword. He made a charge
Straight toward the breasts of Niphaeus’ four-­horse team.
They saw his long strides, heard his gruesome roaring,
And in their panic wheeled and tore away
Their chariot to the shore. Its driver toppled,
The brothers Lucagus and Liger entered
The fight, drawn by white horses, Liger driving,
Lucagus fiercely whirling his bare sword.
Galled by their fervent rage, Aeneas dashed
To loom before them, holding up his spear.

551–­Faunus: An Italian god of woods
and trees.
557–­Lie there, you menace: Vergil reworks the cruelty of Odysseus in Iliad 11

555

560

565

570

575

and of Achilles in Iliad 21, both of whom
denied their enemies proper burial.
565–­Aegaeon: One of the Giants,
also called Briareus.

. 275 .

BOOK 10
And Liger said,
“This is no Trojan plain, no chariot
Of Diomedes or Achilles. Your life
Ends with this war.” From Liger in his folly
These words flew. And the Trojan hero offered
Nothing in answer but to hurl his spear.
Lucagus leaned and, with his weapon’s side,
Slapped his team, but was poised to fight, his left foot
Thrust forward, as Aeneas’ pike breached all
The bright shield’s layers, to transfix his thigh.
He tumbled and rolled dying on the ground.
Righteous Aeneas spitefully addressed him:
“No routed team betrayed your chariot,
Lucagus, no false visions turned them from us.
No, you yourself jumped and abandoned them.”
He seized the reins. Poor Liger, once he’d fallen
From the same chariot, raised helpless hands:
“By your great self, by your proud parents too,
Leave me my breath, have pity, I am pleading.”
Aeneas stopped him. “You spoke differently
Not long ago. Die—don’t desert your brother.”
He slashed the chest, the hiding place of breath.
The Trojan chief went killing down the field
Rampantly, like a black storm or a whirlpool.
At last Ascanius and other troops
Broke from their fortress, as the siege had failed.
Meanwhile, Jove spoke forthcomingly to Juno:
“Sister—and darling spouse—you must be right:
Venus alone upholds the strength of Troy,
Just as you thought, and not their active hands,
And not their savage and unflinching hearts.”
Juno said pliantly: “My splendid husband,
582–­Diomedes or Achilles: That is,
Aeneas may have managed to escape Dio-

580

585

590

595

600

605

610

medes (10.28–29n.) and Achilles (Iliad
20), but he will not survive this time.

. 276 .

BOOK 10
Why do you taunt your weak browbeaten wife?
If you still loved me as you did—and should—
You’d surely do what lies in your great power,
And let me rescue Turnus from the fight
To send unharmed back to his father, Daunus.
No, let them put to death a blameless man,
Although he shares divine descent with us—
Pilumnus was his ancestor; although
He piled your shrine freehandedly with gifts.”
Briefly the king of high Olympus spoke:
“If what you beg is only a reprieve
For the doomed youth, if you accept my terms,
Send Turnus running from his looming fate:
So far I can concede. But if your pleas
Hide hopes of greater mercy, and you think
That the war’s end can change, you are mistaken.”
Juno wept. “If your thoughts grant what your words
Deny, if it’s ordained that he can live—!
No, either I’m deluded, or he’ll die
In unearned pain. I wish my fears deceived me—
Or you’d divert these plans—it’s in your power!”
But then she ringed herself in clouds and shot
Down from the sky, and drove a storm before her,
To the Laurentian camp and Trojan line.
From empty mist and thin and strengthless shadow
She fashioned an Aeneas—eerie marvel.
She copied Trojan arms, the shield, the crest
For his divine head, furnished vacant speech,
Sounds without thoughts. She made it stride like him—
The thing was like the fluttering ghosts in legends;
It looked like dreams that trick our sleeping senses.
The sneering image danced before the lines.
Taunting proud Turnus, teasing with its weapons.
Turnus closed in and hurled a hissing pike
And saw a back turned, saw withdrawing steps,

. 277 .

615

620

625

630

635

640

645

BOOK 10
As if Aeneas were in full retreat.
His heart was full of wild, deluded hope.
“Your wedding’s promised and you run away?
You sailed here seeking land: I’ll lay you on it.”
Shouting, he chased the thing and shook his sword,
But on the wind his triumph slid away.
Moored at a towering outcrop’s base, the ship
That brought Osinius from Clusium
Stood with its ladders out and gangplanks down.
The frightened bolting image of Aeneas
Dove in to hide there, never losing Turnus.
Nothing could slow him—up the plank he vaulted.
He reached the prow, and Juno broke the rope
And wrenched the ship out on retreating waves.
Aeneas, shouting for the absent Turnus,
Dispatched the many warriors in his way.
The fragile phantom now stopped seeking cover
And soared up, then it blended with black cloud.
A whirlwind carried Turnus far from shore.
Bewildered, and ungrateful to be safe,
He looked back, raised his hands and shouted starward,
“Almighty Father, have I earned this shame,
This punishment? Where am I being swept?
From where? And how? And how can I get back?
When will I see the town and camp again,
And that brave company that followed me?
They’re left—the outrage!—ringed by grisly death.
I’ll see them scattered, hear them fall and groan?
What will I do? What pit gapes deep enough
For me? No, pity me instead, you winds.
I beg you with my whole heart, drive this ship
Into the rocks or cliffs or deadly shallows,
Away from the Rutulians and my shame.”
And now two options wavered in his judgment:
Fall on his sword, maddened by his dishonor,

. 278 .

650

655

660

665

670

675

680

BOOK 10
And drive the brutal blade between his ribs?
Dive in mid-­ocean, try to reach the curved shore,
And face the Trojan weapons once again?
Three times he tried each course, three times great Juno
In heartfelt pity held the young man back.
Current and sea swell made a wafting path
Clear to his father Daunus’ ancient city.
Blazing Mezentius, urged on by Jove,
Joined the fight, charging at the cheering Trojans.
The Tuscan ranks closed in on him alone—
All of their hatred, all their crowding weapons.
He stood there like a rock in lonely waters,
Bare to the savagery of wind and waves,
To sea and sky’s unending pounding threats—
Unmoved. He brought down Dolichaon’s son,
Hebrus, then Latagus and timid Palmus.
Into the former’s face Mezentius
Cast an enormous mountain shard to halt him.
Palmus rolled helpless, tendons cut, and Lausus
Received his corselet and his crest to wear.
Phrygian Euanthes died, and Mimas also,
Paris’ friend: both were given life the same night
Through Amycus and Theano, and the queen,
Torch-­pregnant Hecuba. In his own city
One died; Laurentum’s shore holds one, a stranger.
Like a boar chased by snapping dogs from years
Of shelter in high, pine-­clad Vesulus,
Or the Laurentian lake, a forest pasture
Of reeds—but now the net encloses him;

688–­his father Daunus’ ancient city:
Ardea, his capital.
705–­Torch-­pregnant Hecuba: Before the birth of Paris Hecuba dreamed

685

690

695

700

705

710

of giving birth to a torch; Paris would go
on to bring about the fiery destruction of
Troy.

. 279 .

BOOK 10
Snarling, he takes a stand with bristling shoulders.
Who’s brave enough to bring his anger near?
They leave a space, throw spears, shout cautiously;
Fearless, he faces one way, then another,
Gnashing his teeth and shaking off the spears;
So righteous rage against Mezentius
Never found spirit for a charge with swords.
They harried him with long-­range spears and yells.
Acron, from ancient Corythus, a Greek,
Was banished from his wedding and his country.
Mezentius saw him far off, spreading havoc,
In his betrothed’s gifts, purple plumes and clothing.
A lion, maddened by his hunger, searches
Deep coverts—now he sees a fleeing goat
Or stag with towering horns, and spreads his jaws
Joyfully wide, bristles his mane, then crouches
Engrossed in entrails; on voracious lips
The grim gore oozes—
So keen Mezentius charged hostile throngs.
Unlucky Acron fell and kicked black earth
And stained the broken spear with dying blood.
The fighter wouldn’t stoop to kill the fleeing
Orodes with a spear throw to the back.
He dashed in front and met him man to man—
Superior in warcraft, not in stealth—
Felled him, and stepped on him to pull the spear out.
“Here great Orodes lies—one of their best.”
His troops yelled, echoing his victory chant.
Orodes gasped in death, “I’ll have revenge soon.
You won’t gloat long, whoever you might be.
The same fate, in this same field, waits for you.”
714–20–­The translator is following
R. D. Williams (The “Aeneid” of Virgil) in
reordering these lines.

. 280 .

717
718
714
715
716
719
720

725

730

735

740

BOOK 10
Anger infused Mezentius’ smile. “Die now.
The gods’ sire and the king of men will see
To me.” He yanked the spear free, and Orodes
Closed eyes that iron sleep, hard rest pressed down:
He entered endless night. Caedicus killed
Alcathoüs, Sacrator killed Hydaspes;
Rapos, Parthenius and iron Orses;
Messapus, Clonius, whom bolting horses
Sent sprawling, and Erichaetes as well,
Lycaon’s son, on foot—like Lycian Agis,
Dispatched by Valerus, brave as his grandsire;
Thonius next, by Salius—who fell
To Neacles, famed lancer, cunning archer.
Now heavy fighting balanced grief and slaughter
Between the sides. On both they won and lost,
Killed and went down, and neither would retreat.
The gods assembled in Jove’s palace pitied
Such futile rage, such dreadful human hurt.
Venus looked on, across from Saturn’s daughter,
As pale Tisiphone raved through those thousands.
Raging Mezentius, shaking a huge spear,
Strode on, as massive as Orion walking
Across the seafloor, in the deepest waters,
But towering above them from his shoulders;
Or bringing an old ash tree from a summit,
Feet on the earth, head hidden in the clouds.
Mezentius, like him, but hugely armored,
Advanced. Aeneas saw him in the long line
And started toward him. Stable in his huge bulk,
Calm, he awaited his brave enemy,
And gauged how far he had to throw his spear.
761–­Tisiphone: The leader of the
Furies.

745

750

755

760

765

770

763–­Orion: The mythological hunter,
made into a constellation by Jupiter on
his death.

. 281 .

BOOK 10
“Help me, hand that’s my god; help me, this spear
That’s poised! My son will be the monument—
My Lausus, draped in armor from that bandit,
Aeneas.” And he whipped a whistling spear
At long range. From the shield it glanced—flew—hit
Lovely Antores just above the groin:
Hercules’, then Evander’s follower,
Greek exile, settler in a local town;
A hapless proxy victim now, he gazed
Up at the sky and thought of darling Argos.
Then dutiful Aeneas’ spear slammed clear through
Mezentius’ domed shield of three bronze layers,
Three hides and linen padding. In the groin
It stuck, but not with force. It thrilled Aeneas
To draw Etruscan blood. He drew his sword
Eagerly, charging at his trembling target.
Lausus saw, and for love of his dear father,
He moaned. The tears were rolling down his face.
I won’t be silent here about your exploit
Or the hard death it brought—you’ve earned the telling,
Heroic boy—if we believe tradition.
Mezentius fell back helpless, hampered, dragging
The shield, the enemy’s spear lodged in it.
His youthful son now tore into the clash.
Aeneas reared and raised his sword to strike.
Lausus ducked in with a defensive stroke
That stopped him. The boy’s comrades came up nearer,
Shouting, and threw harassing spears to let
The father get away beneath the son’s shield.
Aeneas held out, raging in his shelter.
Just as when storm clouds hurtle down in hail,
773–­hand that’s my god: Mezentius,
the “wild scorner of the gods” (7.648)
worships only his own strength.

775

780

785

790

795

800

783–­dutiful: Another way of translating pius.

. 282 .

BOOK 10
And every plowing farmer runs for refuge,
And travelers find shelter in some stronghold—
A jutting riverbank, an arch of high rock—
Till at the rain’s end they resume their day
In sunlight; so beneath a pelting war cloud
Aeneas held up till its thunder died,
And only shot insulting threats at Lausus.
“Why do you rush to die here? You’re outmatched,
Dupe of your loyal love!” The boy paraded
In senseless triumph. In the Trojan leader
Rage mounted, and the Fates prepared to cut
The threads of Lausus’ life. Aeneas sank
The whole strong sword’s length in the young man’s belly,
First through the shield—flimsy to brag behind—
And the soft gold mail coat his mother’d woven.
Blood filled his breast. The soul slipped from his body
And through the air, departing for the shades.
But when Anchises’ son saw that pale face—
The dying face uncanny in its pallor—
He moaned in pity, stretching out his hand.
He saw in him his own love for Anchises.
“Poor boy! They call me ‘good.’ What will I give you
To match your courage? Your dear weapons—keep them.
And you I’ll send to the ancestral ashes
And spirits, if that matters to you now.
But this should solace your pathetic death:
It came from great Aeneas.” He berated
The boy’s troops, who were hanging back, and lifted
The body with its smooth-­combed bloodstained hair.
Meanwhile the father, at the Tiber’s banks,
814–15–­
the Fates prepared to cut
the threads of Lausus’ life: the job of
the Fates was to spin the threads of each
mortal life and measure and cut them
when the person was due to die.

805

810

815

820

825

830

825–­“good”: Another way of translating pius.

. 283 .

BOOK 10
Rinsed his wound, leaning weakly on a tree trunk.
Far away, his bronze helmet hung from branches;
His heavy weapons rested on the grass.
He gasped in pain, among his young retainers,
Head down, his combed beard trailing on his chest.
Often he asked how Lausus did, and ordered
Runners to call him to his wretched father.
His weeping friends brought Lausus’ massive body—
Massively wounded—lying on a shield.
Mezentius knew those groans and sensed disaster.
He dirtied his white hair with dust and raised
Both hands to heaven, then embraced the corpse.
“Did I have such delight in life, my child—
My own son—that I let you take my place
Against the enemy? Did these wounds save
Your father, living by your death? How dismal
My exile is at last, how deep my wound.
And it was me who smeared your name with guilt—
Me, hounded from the kingship of our fathers.
By any means they chose, I should have given
My guilty life to soothe my country’s hatred.
But still I haven’t left this world, this daylight—
Not yet.” He got up on his ruined thigh,
Unbeaten. Though the deep stab crippled him,
He had them fetch his horse—his pride and comfort,
Who brought him out of every fight a victor—
And to this grieving animal he spoke:
“Rhoebus, if anything lasts long for mortals,
Our life has. Triumphing with me today,
You’ll fetch that gory plunder, and Aeneas’
Head, which will be revenge for Lausus’ anguish.
And if we haven’t got the strength to do it,
850–­My exile: Mezentius had been
exiled for his cruelty (8.481–95).

. 284 .

835

840

845

850

855

860

865

BOOK 10
You’ll fall with me. Brave thing, I don’t believe
You’d take your orders from a Trojan master.”
He settled in his old place, with a sharp pike
Hefted in either hand, and his bronze helmet
Flashing beneath a bristling horsehair plume.
He dashed into the battle lines, his heart
Seething with shame and grief that drove him wild;
Spurred by mad passion and familiar courage.
Three times he yelled, “Aeneas!”—who then prayed
With joy: “Yes, Father of gods, and high Apollo!
Now—you, come grapple.”
He stopped before him, leveling a spear.
“My son is gone, you savage. What’s your threat?
That was the only way you could destroy me.
I don’t fear death. To me the gods are nothing.
Quiet then. Take these gifts before I die.”
He hastened in a spacious circle, launching
One weapon, then another, then one more,
And lodged them in the shield. The gold boss held,
The hero stood. Mezentius wheeled left
Three times and hurled more spears. Three times the Trojan
Pivoted with his shield—a ghastly forest.
Impatiently he pulled out all the barbs,
Under the pressure of unequal combat.
At last he charged straight out and flung a spear,
Which struck between the horse’s curving temples.
The creature reared up, battering the air.
The rider toppled, and the horse fell headlong,
Pinning him to the ground, his shoulder ripped.
Trojan and Latin shouts lit up the sky.
Up ran Aeneas, wrenching free his sword.
“Where’s fierce Mezentius now, his spirit’s violence?”
872–­The line is thought to be spurious.

. 285 .

870

875

880

885

890

895

BOOK 10
The Tuscan now lay coming to himself,
Gasping the sky in, gazing at the air.
“Cruel enemy—why sneering threats of death?
Killing’s no crime—I came here knowing that.
My Lausus made no pact with you to save me.
I ask one thing, though, if the beaten can:
Let the earth cover me. I am surrounded
By hatred from my people. Guard me from it,
Please, and let one tomb hold my son and me.”
He gave his throat on purpose to the sword
And poured his life out—waves of blood on armor.

. 286 .

900

905
