Now the queen’s lifeblood fed her brutal love wound;
A flame, unseen, gnawed at her hour by hour.
His martial manhood and his family’s glory
Came back to her—his face, his words now clung to
Her heart; her body had no peace or rest.
Dawn had raised Phoebus’ torch to light the earth,
And pushed the drizzling shadows from the sky,
When stricken Dido told her loving sister:
“Anna, half-­waking dreams have terrified me.
This stranger who has come here as our guest—
His face, his walk, his heart’s and weapons’ strength—
I think—it must be true—this is a god’s child.
Fear marks plebeian spirits. How I pity
His hard fate and the long, grim war he told of!
If ever my heart moved from where I fixed it—
I set myself against the ties of marriage
When death had cheated me of my first love,
Blighting for me the wedding torch and chamber—
I might relent, this single time, and falter.
Anna, I must confess, since poor Sychaeus
Fell, since my brother stained our home with murder,
This one alone has moved me; now I waver.
I recognize the remnants of that flame.
6–­Phoebus’ torch: The sun; Phoebus
is Apollo, the sun god.
10–­stranger . . . guest: The Greeks
and Romans believed in treating
strangers as honored guests.

5

10

15

20

17–­my first love: Dido’s dead husband, Sychaeus.
21–­my brother . . . murder: Pygmalion, king of Tyre and Dido’s brother,
had Sychaeus killed. See Venus’ narrative
at 1.338–68.

. 85 .

BOOK 4
But let the earth first gape to its foundation,
Or the almighty father’s lightning drive me
To the pale shades of Erebus and deep night,
Before I wrong you, Honor, and your laws.
The man who first was part of me has taken
My love. He ought to keep it where he’s buried.”
Her overflowing tears now soaked her dress.
Anna replied, “You, who are more than life
To me, mean to let grief devour your youth,
Without sweet children and the gifts of Venus?
You think that ashes care, or ghosts in graveyards?
Both here in Libya and back in Tyre
No suitors tamed your grief. Iarbas and others
Reared by this rich, triumphant Africa
Are scorned—and now you fight a love that suits you?
Recall whose land this is you’ve made your home in:
The cities of Gaetulians, never conquered,
The wild Numidians, treacherous Syrtis,
Bare desert, and marauding Barcaeans
Encircle you, and conflict looms from Tyre—
Your brother threatens.
It was the provident gods and Juno’s favor
That steered the Trojan ships here on the wind.
The city that you’ll see, the rising empire
Out of this marriage! Trojan allied arms
Will bring this Punic town to soaring glory.

33–­the gifts of Venus: Sex.
35–­Libya: Here, Africa is meant.
35–­Tyre: Dido’s hometown in Phoenicia (modern Lebanon) which she fled
after the murder of her husband.
36–­Iarbas: Dido’s most determined
suitor; king of the Gaetulians and son of
the African god Ammon (Jupiter’s African counterpart). See 4.196–219.

25

30

35

40

45

40–41–­Gaetulians . . . Numidians:
Peoples of northern Africa.
41–­Syrtis: Dangerous sandbanks in
the modern Gulf of Sirte.
42–­Barcaeans: Barce was a city close
to modern-­day Tripoli. Vergil may mention it here for its resemblance to Hannibal’s family name, Barca. See 4.386n.
49–­Punic: Carthaginian.

. 86 .

BOOK 4
Seek the gods’ sanction with propitious gifts.
Weave pretexts for delaying as you fete him:
Seas raging through the days of wet Orion,
Ships damaged, and a hard and stubborn sky.”
This appeal made the spark of passion blaze,
Lent hope to hesitation, melted shame.
First they approached each temple and its altar
With ritual pleas, killed chosen sheep for Phoebus,
Law-­giving Ceres, the Lyaean Father,
But Juno first, who joins the bonds of marriage.
Radiant Dido held the bowl, her right hand
Tipping it on a snow-­white heifer’s forehead.
She strode beneath gods’ eyes to wealthy altars,
Began each day with gifts, searched for the meaning
Cut open in the steaming guts of beasts.
O empty-­minded augurs! In her madness,
What use were prayers and temples? Flame devoured
Soft marrow, and a heart’s wound throbbed in hiding.
Poor Dido burned, raved, wandered through the city,
As when a deer, at peace in Cretan glades,
Is pierced from far off by a hunting shepherd.
Not knowing where the flying iron point
Landed, he leaves it. Through the groves of Dicte
She runs at random, in her side the death reed.
Now Dido leads Aeneas through the fortress,
Shows him Sidonian wealth, the rising city,
Begins to speak but leaves her words half-­said.
At fall of daylight, she repeats her banquet,

52–­Orion: The setting of the constellation Orion in November was linked to
stormy weather.
58–­the Lyaean Father: Bacchus, here
called “The Looser” as the god of wine
and revelry.

50

55

60

65

70

75

72–­Dicte: A mountain in Crete.
75–­Sidonian: Carthaginian; Sidon
was a city in Phoenicia.

. 87 .

BOOK 4
Demands to hear the Trojans’ trials again,
Again hangs on his words in her delusion.
Her guests are gone, the moon puts out its dim light,
And falling constellations counsel sleep;
She sorrows in the empty house, reclining
There on the couch he left—sees, hears his absence.
She holds Ascanius—so like his father!—
In her lap, cheats her real and shameful love.
The towers she began don’t rise. The young men
No longer drill or build defending ramparts
Or ports. The work stalls, halfway done—the menace
Of high walls, and the cranes as high as heaven.
So sickness gripped the queen, who let her folly
Outrun her good name. Juno, Jove’s dear wife
And Saturn’s daughter, saw, and went to Venus.
“Truly, your son and you have won such glory,
Such huge spoils. Power worth eternal praise
Shows in two gods who dupe a mortal woman!
I know that you’ve been wary of our walls here,
Distrustful when you saw high Carthage settled.
Where will this end? Where is this fierce fight going?
Why not a lasting treaty and a contract
Of marriage? What your heart desired, you have.
Dido’s love burns. Her bones draw in its fury.
Why not unite two races? We can rule them
Together. As a Phrygian husband’s slave,
She’ll hand you all these Tyrians, her dowry.”
But Venus felt the trick in this, the effort
To steer Italian power to Libya.
She countered: “To agree is merely sane.
Who would prefer to take up arms against you?
If only what you plan succeeds in practice . . .
103–­Phrygian: Here, Trojan; Juno
refers to Aeneas.

. 88 .

80

85

90

95

100

105

BOOK 4
Fate, to me, sways, uncertain. Is Jove’s plan
One town for Tyrians and Trojan exiles?
Alliance or a blended population?
You, as his wife, could rightly probe his thinking.
Ask him, and I’ll be with you.” Juno answered,
“Leave that to me. For now, I’ll tell you briefly—
So listen—how we finish what’s at hand.
Poor Dido and Aeneas are preparing
A woodland hunting trip at dawn tomorrow,
When the sun’s rising rays reveal the round earth.
While horsemen rush to cordon off the passes,
I’ll mingle dusky cloud with hail and rain
And pour it down and shake the sky with thunder.
Their retinue will scatter in the dark.
The same cave will receive the Trojan leader
And Dido. I’ll be there (with your approval);
Join her to him, make her his own in marriage
That’s sanctioned. These will be the rites.” Then Venus,
Amused at the duplicity, agreed.
Dawn rose now, leaving Ocean; and the gates,
In her fresh rays, emitted chosen troops,
With nets and traps and broad-­tipped hunting spears.
Massylian horsemen, keen-­nosed dogs ran forward.
At the queen’s door the Tyrian leaders waited.
Her horse stood radiant in gold and purple,
And fiercely stamped, and gnawed a foaming bit.
At last, thronged with her retinue, she came.
Her cloak was Punic, edged with lavish stitching.
Her hair was clasped in gold, her quiver gold,
A brooch of gold secured her purple robe.
The Trojan troops and an excited Iulus
126–­in marriage: Juno is the goddess
of marriage.

110

115

120

125

130

135

140

132–­Massylian: Refers to a people of
northern Africa.

. 89 .

BOOK 4
Came up. Finest of all these was Aeneas,
Who as her escort joined his ranks with hers.
Apollo, coming to his mother’s Delos
From winter Lycia and the river Xanthus,
Renews the dance. Around the altar shout
Dryopians, Cretans, tattooed Agathyrsi.
He walks the slope of Cynthus with his long hair
Braided and bound with tender leaves and gold.
Arrows clank on his shoulder. Just as lively,
As beautiful, as noble, rode Aeneas.
They came into the hills and trackless woods.
Wild goats they started from a stony summit
Ran down the slope. Deer from another refuge
Sped off in crowding ranks across the bare plain,
In dusty panic to escape the mountain.
The boy Ascanius, keen-­horsed keen rider,
Outraced each troop of hunters through the valley
And scorned the tame herds—better that the heights
Disgorge foam-­spitting boars or tawny lions!
From the sky now a racket and a tumult
Erupted; storm clouds shot in, full of hail.
Trojan youth, Punic escorts, Venus’ grandson
From Dardanus’ realm scattered through the fields
Toward urgent shelter. From the hillsides, streams rushed.
The Trojan lord and Dido found the same cave.
Primeval Earth and Juno, bride-­bestower,
Signaled, and in collusion, lightning flashed
At the union. On the mountaintops nymphs howled.
From this day came catastrophe and death.

143–­Delos: The island in the Aegean
Sea where Apollo and his twin sister,
Diana, were born.
144–­Lycia: In Anatolia, modern Turkey.

145

150

155

160

165

146–­
Dryopians . . . Agathyrsi:
Somewhat obscure Greek tribes.
147–­Cynthus: A mountain on Delos.
166–­Primeval Earth: A Roman goddess.

. 90 .

BOOK 4
No thought of public scandal or of hiding
Her passion troubled Dido any longer.
She called it marriage, covering her own fault.
Rumor, the swiftest plague there is, went straight
To all the settlements of Libya.
She thrives on motion, drawing strength from travel;
Tiny and timid first, then shooting upward,
She hides her head in clouds yet walks the ground.
They say the Earth, in anger at the gods,
Bore this child last, quick-­footed, quick-­winged sister
Of Titan Enceladus and huge Coeus.
Beneath each feather of the ghastly monster—
This is the startling legend—is a wide eye,
A tongue, a blaring mouth, a pricked-­up ear.
Between the earth and sky, in shadow, shrieking,
She flies at night. No sweet sleep shuts her eyes.
By day she sits as lookout on a rooftop
Or a high tower and alarms great cities.
Her claws hold both true news and evil lies.
She filled the realms now with her tangled talk,
Chanting in glee a mix of fact and fiction:
“Aeneas, from a Trojan family, came here.
Beautiful Dido chose him as her lover.
What kind of rulers spend the whole long winter
Sunk deep in sensuous and sordid passion?”
The ugly goddess passed along these stories
At large, then flew directly to King Iarbas,
173–­Rumor: Latin Fama, a deity.
178–80–­the Earth . . . huge Coeus:
The Olympian gods came to power
by staging a coup against the previous
generation, the Titans. The Earth goddess Gaia, their mother, took revenge by
birthing the chaos-­spreader Rumor.

170

175

180

185

190

195

193–94–­What kind of rulers . . . sor­
did passion?: Vergil’s language probably
evoked images of Antony and Cleopatra
for his contemporary audience.
196–­Iarbas: See 4.36n.

. 91 .

BOOK 4
And with her words piled high and lit his rage.
A Garamantian nymph and Ammon’s violence
Created him. His broad lands raised to Jove
A hundred huge shrines. Priests and altar flames
Kept constant vigils for the gods, while herds’ blood
Slathered the floor and bright wreaths decked the doorways.
Stung with this hearsay now, in frantic rage,
He faced the living gods before their altars,
Raised suppliant hands and prayed insistently,
“Almighty Jove, to whom the race of Moors
On their embroidered couches pour libations—
Here, have you seen? When you hurl thunder, Father,
Is terror needless? Is that fire, that noise
Up in the clouds without an aim or meaning?
A woman straying on my borders rented
A scrap of shore for building on and farming
On my conditions. She refused me marriage
But lets Aeneas rule with her—no, rule her.
That Paris with his mincing retinue,
An Asian headdress on his perfumed hair,
Masters his loot. I guess it’s empty legend
Alone that makes us fill your shrines with gifts?”
This was the king’s prayer as he grasped the altar;
And the almighty heard, and turned to see
The queen’s walls and the heedless, shameless lovers.
He spoke to Mercury and gave this order:
“Call the West Winds, my son, glide on your wings;
Speak to the Trojan leader loitering
At Tyrian Carthage with no thought for cities

198–­Ammon: An African deity identified with Jupiter.
206–­Moors: The people of Mauretania in northwest Africa.
215–­
That Paris with his mincing

200

205

210

215

220

225

retinue: Iarbas disparages Aeneas by
linking him with his fellow Trojan Paris,
first as a wife stealer, and second as effeminate, a charge typical of Roman
prejudice toward Easterners.

. 92 .

BOOK 4
Granted by fate. Go, hurry my words landward.
This wasn’t what his lovely mother promised,
Or why, both times, she saved him from the Greeks,
But to rule Italy, beget an empire
That roars with war, to give us noble Teucer’s
Descendants, who will bring the whole world laws.
If this majestic future cannot rouse him
To take this labor on for his own glory,
Does he begrudge his son the Roman fortress?
What can he gain here in a hostile nation?
Ausonian progeny? Lavinian fields?
The sum of what I want him told: Set sail!”
He spoke. So on his mighty father’s orders,
The son prepared, first tying golden sandals
Onto his feet, to take him swift as wind
High over land and ocean on their wings.
He took the wand that calls pale souls from Orcus,
Sends them to gloomy Tartarus, awakens
And puts to sleep, and opens perished eyes.
With this he drove the winds and skimmed through chaos
Of clouds. He saw the brow and looming flanks
Of rocky Atlas, prop of the high heavens—
Atlas, with black clouds always at his head,
Where the pines grow, and wind and rain blast hard.
The snow spreads down his shoulders. Off the chin
Of the old man torrents pour. Ice locks his sharp beard.
Mercury halted, poised on balanced wings,
228–­she saved him from the Greeks:
Venus first spirited Aeneas away from a
deadly battle with Diomedes (Iliad 5);
she then directed him out of Troy as it
fell (see 2.589–92).
236–­Ausonian: Italian.
242–43–­Orcus . . . Tartarus: Under-

230

235

240

245

250

world locations. Mercury is a guide of
souls, or psychopomp, tasked with leading the dead to and from the Underworld
with his wand.
247–­Atlas: Mercury’s grandfather;
the Titan condemned to hold the sky on
his shoulders.

. 93 .

BOOK 4
Then hurled his body headlong toward the waves.
A certain kind of bird skims shoreline waters
Or rounds the base of crags where fish are teeming.
Like this, Cyllene’s native sliced the winds,
Leaving his mother’s father, passed to earth,
To Libya’s sandy shoreline, where he landed.
He set his feathered feet among the shanties
And saw Aeneas laying out the towers
And building houses. Tawny jasper flecked
His sword. His shoulders trailed a purple cloak,
Glowingly rich, with thin gold stripes, a present
Woven by wealthy Dido. The god scolded:
“Your wife must like you laying the foundations
For lofty Carthage, such a splendid city—
Forgetting your own kingdom that awaits you.
The ruler of the gods, whose strength bends heaven
And earth, has sent me down from bright Olympus,
Commanding that I fly here with this message:
What will this loitering in Libya bring you?
If you’re unmoved by all the coming splendor,
Which is a weight you do not wish to shoulder,
Think of your hopes as Iulus grows, your heir,
Owed an Italian realm and Roman soil.”
These were the words from the Cyllenian’s mouth.
Still speaking, he passed out of human vision
And trailed away until the thin air hid him.
This apparition left Aeneas stunned.
His hair stood up, and words stuck in his throat.

254–­A certain kind of bird: Probably a gull; the simile echoes Odyssey 5,
in which Mercury, sent by Jupiter, orders
Odysseus (Ulysses) to leave his lover
Calypso and continue his journey home.
256–­Cyllene’s native: Maia, a daugh-

255

260

265

270

275

280

ter of Atlas, bore Mercury on Mount Cyllene in southern Greece.
261–­Tawny jasper: The jewels are on
the hilt or the scabbard.
273–­The line is thought to be spurious.

. 94 .

BOOK 4
He burned to run, however sweet this land was.
The gods’ august command had terrified him.
But how? What would he dare to tell the queen—
So passionate? How could he start explaining?
His mind kept darting and his thoughts dividing
Through the whole matter and each baffling question.
After much wavering, this seemed the best plan:
He called Mnestheus and brave Serestus
And Sergestus: they must get the men together
Quietly, rig the fleet, and hide the reason
Things stirred. And meanwhile Dido, the good lady,
Would not expect such vital love could fail.
He would approach her at the kindest time
And seek the best words. With alacrity,
These men obeyed in everything he ordered.
But who can fool a lover? Soon the queen—
Anxious when nothing threatened—sensed the trick,
Though no ship moved yet. Evil Rumor told her
The fleet was being fitted for a journey.
She raved all through the town in helpless passion,
Like a bacchant customary mysteries rouse
With ritual ululations, brandished emblems,
And shouts that summon her to dark Cithaeron.
She faced off with Aeneas and accused him:
“You traitor, did you think that you could hide
Such a great crime, that you could sneak away?
The pledge you made, our passion for each other,
Even your Dido’s brutal death won’t keep you?
Monster, you toil beneath these winter skies
And rush to cross the deep through northern blasts—
For a strange home on someone else’s land?
301–­bacchant: a female follower of
Bacchus.
303– ­Cithaeron: Mountain near

285

290

295

300

305

310

Thebes, sacred to Bacchus and hence the
location of bacchic rituals performed by
the bacchantes.

. 95 .

BOOK 4
If ancient Troy still stood today to sail to,
Would you make off across that surging plain?
You run from me? By your pledged hand, my tears
(Since everything but these is stripped from me),
Our union, and the wedding we embarked on—
If I have ever earned it through my kindness,
Have pity on my tottering house and me.
If pleading has a chance still, change your mind.
The Libyan clans and Nomad rulers hate me,
So do the Tyrians, because of you.
You ruined me and my good name—my one path
To the stars. Tell me, my guest (the sole term left—
Not spouse): Whose hands will kill what you abandon?
My prospect? Will Pygmalion raze my walls?
Gaetulian Iarbas lead me off, a captive?
If only I’d conceived before you bolted,
And had your offspring, if a small Aeneas
Played in my palace, with a face like yours—
I wouldn’t feel so cheated and abandoned.”
She spoke; he kept his eyes down, at Jove’s orders,
Struggling to force his feelings from his heart.
Finally, briefly: “Name your favors, list them.
There isn’t one I ever would deny.
Never will I regret Elissa’s memory
While I have memory, while I breathe and move.
A little on the facts, though: don’t imagine
I meant to sneak away; and as for spouse,
I never made a pact of marriage with you.
If fate would let me live the life I chose,

320–­
Libyan clans and Nomad
rulers: Dido refers to the local tribes in
North Africa in whose territory her city
of Carthage was being built.
325–­Pygmalion: see 4.21n.

315

320

325

330

335

340

335–­Elissa: An alternate name for
Dido.
339–­I never made: Aeneas’ interpretation of what happened in the cave differs from Dido’s (4.172).

. 96 .

BOOK 4
If I had power over my decisions,
I would have stayed at Troy, where I could tend
Belovèd graves; Priam’s high house would stand;
I would have built a new Troy for the conquered.
But Grynean Apollo and the edicts
Of Lycia drive me into Italy.
My love, my home are this. You, though Phoenician,
Are riveted by towers in Libya.
So how can you resent us Trojans’ settling
In Italy, our lawful foreign kingdom?
When the night masks the earth with drizzling shadows,
When fiery stars rise, then the troubled ghost
Of my father, dear Anchises, hounds my dreams.
I know I cheat Ascanius, my dear son,
Out of his western realm, the fields fate grants.
The envoy of the gods, dispatched by Jove
Himself (I swear, on both our heads), brought orders
Down through the air. In the clear day I saw him
Within these walls, and these ears heard his voice.
Don’t goad me—and yourself—with these complaints.
Italy is against my will.”
Although her back was turned, she still surveyed
The speaker blankly and distractedly
Over her shoulder, then broke out in fury.
“Traitor—there is no goddess in your family,
No Dardanus. The sharp-­rocked Caucasus
345–46–­
Grynean Apollo and the
edicts of Lycia: A reference to the oracles
authorizing Aeneas’ quest; Apollo was
worshipped under the title “Grynean” in
the Aeolis, a northwestern region of Asia
Minor, and under the title “Lycian” in
southwestern Asia Minor. Compare the
oracles of Apollo at 3.161–62.
356–­
envoy of the gods: The god
Mercury.

345

350

355

360

365

365–­no goddess: Dido rejects Aeneas’
claim that his mother is Venus.
366–­Dardanus: Son of Jupiter and
Electra, ancestor of Ilus, Tros, and the
Trojans.
366–­Caucasus: Mountains between
the Black Sea and the Caspian Sea, regarded as harsh and inhospitable.

. 97 .

BOOK 4
Gave birth to you, Hyrcanian tigers nursed you.
Why pretend now? Is something worse in store?
Was there a sigh for tears of mine? A glance?
Did he give in to tears himself, or pity?
Injustice overwhelms me—which concerns
Great Juno and our father, Saturn’s son.
What bond can hold? I helped a castaway,
I shared a kingdom with him, like a fool.
The ships you lost—I saved your friends from death—
Hot madness drives me. Now the fortune-­teller
Apollo, Lycian lotteries, Jove dispatching
Dire orders earthward through the gods’ own mouthpiece—
As if such work and worry roiled their peace!
I will not cling to you or contradict you.
Ride windy waves to chase Italian kingdoms.
I hope that heaven’s conscience has the power
To trap you in the rocks and force reprisal
Down your throat, as you call my name. I’ll send—
I’ll bring black flames, I’ll hound you after cold death
Draws out my soul. Even among the dead
In hell, I’ll hear when you, at last, are paying.”
In torment, she broke off and turned away,
And ran out of his sight into the palace.
Frozen, he stood—prepared to say so much.

367–­Hyrcanian tigers: Hyrcania was
the region southeast of the Caspian Sea
and regarded as extremely wild.
372–­Saturn’s son: Jupiter. Dido here
refers to the gods as parents of humankind.
377–­Lycian lotteries: A disparaging
recasting of lines 345–46: see note.
379–­As if such work . . . peace!: In
the view of Epicureans, the gods existed,

370

375

380

385

390

but in a separate realm untroubled by
human concerns.
386–­Even among the dead: Anticipates Dido’s dying curse on Aeneas, in
which she calls for an avenger (625–29),
understood by the Roman audience to
be Hannibal of Carthage, though he is
never named in the poem, who waged
war on Rome in the Second Punic War
(218–201 BCE).

. 98 .

BOOK 4
She fainted and was lifted by her maids;
The bed inside the marble walls received her.
Now the right-­thinking hero, though he wished
To give some comfort for so great a grief,
Obeyed the gods, returning to his ships,
While he continued groaning, deeply lovesick.
The Trojans fell to work and pulled the vessels
Down from the beach in one long line. Tarred hulls
Floated. The busy crews brought leafy oars
And logs with bark still on them.
That rush from everywhere in town resembled
Ants plundering a giant heap of spelt
To store at home in readiness for winter.
Over the grass the thin black phalanx goes,
Loaded with booty. Some are heaving huge grains
Forward, and some are marshaling and prodding,
So the entire pathway hums with work.
What did you feel, then, Dido, when you saw?
How did you sob when all that shoreline seethed?
You gazed from your high tower: that whole sea
Was an industrious uproar and commotion.
Reprobate Love, wrencher of human hearts!
She’s driven now to tears, and now to beg
And cravenly submit her pride to passion—
Whatever leaves a hope of shunning death.
“Anna, you see the whole shore in a tumult.
They come from everywhere. Sails draw the breeze.
Sailors in joy hang garlands on the sterns.
As surely as I saw this great grief coming,
So surely I’ll endure. But do one service
In pity, since the traitor was your friend—
Yours only: you were trusted with his secrets,
And you know how to reach him when he’s weak.
Go, sister, kneel to my proud enemy.

. 99 .

395

400

405

410

415

420

BOOK 4
I was no Greek at Aulis when they swore
To smash his race. I sent no fleet to Troy,
Nor made his father’s ghost and ashes homeless.
How can he block his ears against my words?
Where is he running? As a last sad love gift,
He ought to wait for winds that make it easy.
I do not plead the marriage he betrayed.
Let the man go be king in charming Latium.
I just want time, a pause to heal my mind
And teach myself to mourn in my defeat.
I ask this final wretched favor, sister—
A loan—and I will give my death as interest.”
Weeping, she made this plea. Her grieving sister
Delivered it repeatedly. No tears
Could move him; no words found his sympathy.
His fate and Jupiter had barred his ears.
As in the Alps, the North Wind’s blasts assault
A solid, tough, and venerable oak,
Competing to uproot it; under hard blows,
Creaking, it spreads its high leaves on the ground
But clasps the cliff with roots that go as far
Toward hell as its top reaches up to heaven:
Just as relentless were the words that battered
The hero. Though his generous heart suffered,
The tears fell useless. His resolve endured.
Appalled now by her fate, poor Dido prayed
For death; she wished to see the sky no longer.
But there was more to drive her from the daylight:
Her gifts on incense-­burning altars rotted,

425–26–­Greek at Aulis when they
swore to smash his race: The Greek
commanders met at Aulis before setting
off to attack Troy; Agamemnon sacrificed
his daughter Iphigeneia there.

425

430

435

440

445

450

449–­The tears fell useless: Critics
debate whose tears these are, Anna’s or
Aeneas’.

. 100 .

BOOK 4
Horrible to describe; wine turned to black
And filthy gore the second that she poured it.
No one was told. Her sister did not know it.
There stood inside her home a marble shrine
To her dead husband: there she worshipped him,
Spreading white fleece and hanging holy wreaths.
She thought she heard his echoing voice call there.
When the night’s darkness covered all the earth,
She listened to a lone owl on a rooftree,
Whose song of death kept trailing into sobs.
Many grim warnings of the long-­dead seers
Panicked her too. In dreams a fierce Aeneas
Chased her. She raved in fear or was abandoned,
Friendless, forever walking a long road,
Seeking her Tyrians in a lifeless land:
So Pentheus, in madness, saw a phalanx
Of Furies, two Thebes, and a double sun;
So, in a play, the son of Agamemnon
Runs from his mother’s torches and black snakes,
While vengeful demons lurk outside the door.
Her conquered heart was full of grief and madness,
And she chose death. She had a time and method,
But hid her plan behind a face of peace
And hope, in speaking to her wretched sister.
“Anna, I’ve found a way—congratulate me!—
To bring him back or set me free from love.
Next to the setting sun and Ocean’s boundary,
In Ethiopia, where giant Atlas
469–70–­Pentheus . . . a double sun:
The Theban king Pentheus banned the
worship of Bacchus and was driven mad
by the god; this description of his hallucinations is reworked from Euripides’
Bacchae.
471–73–­the son of Agamemnon . . .

455

460

465

470

475

480

outside the door: Orestes killed his
mother, Clytemnestra, in revenge for her
murder of his father, Agamemnon. He
was pursued by his mother’s ghost and
by the Furies, snake-­haired Underworld
entities who wield torches, as related in
Aeschylus’ Oresteia.

. 101 .

BOOK 4
Turns the star-­blazing heavens on his shoulder,
Lived a Massylian priestess I’ve now found,
Who guarded the Hesperides’ shrine there,
Nourished the snake, preserved the sacred branches,
And strewed sleep-­bringing poppy and moist honey.
She says her spells soothe any minds she wishes
Or send out grueling troubles into others,
Stop rivers, turn stars backward in their courses,
And call out ghosts at night. The earth will roar
Beneath your feet, as ash trees rush down mountains.
Sister, I swear it by your darling life
And by the gods—I wouldn’t choose such weapons.
Build me a pyre in secret in the courtyard.
The arms that evil man hung in our bedroom,
The clothes he left me here, our bed of union
(My death)—put it all there. I want the remnants
Of the criminal destroyed. She’s shown me how.”
Now she was silent, and her face went pale.
But Anna didn’t guess her sister’s funeral
Hid in these strange rites, or suspect such frenzy—
What could be worse than when Sychaeus died?
She did as she was told.
Deep in the house, beneath the sky, a pyre
Now towered high, with logs of pine and oak.
The queen festooned the walls with funeral garlands.
Conscious of what must be, she put his picture
On the bed, above his sword and cast-­off clothes.
483–­Massylian: Relevant here as
tragic foreshadowing for Dido. In the
Second Punic War the North African
Massylian king Massinissa betrayed the
Carthaginians to help the Romans, but
the Romans refused to pardon his Carthaginian wife, resulting in her suicide.

485

490

495

500

505

484–­
the Hesperides’ shrine: The
Hesperides were the nymphs of the evening; their shrine, an orchard of golden
apples, was believed to be located in
northern Africa.

. 102 .

BOOK 4
Altars stood round. The loose-­haired priestess called
Countless gods—Erebus, Chaos, Hecate
With three forms, or Diana with three faces.
She sprinkled drops she said were from Avernus.
Herbs appeared, cut with bronze knives at the full moon,
Swollen and oozing coal-­black milk of poison;
A love charm too, torn from a new foal’s forehead
Before the mare could get it.
Dido, with sacred meal in clean hands, robes loose,
One sandal off, now stood at the high altar,
Called gods, called fate-­wise stars as witnesses.
She prayed to anything in heaven that sees
And punishes a broken bond of love.
Now it was night, and all earth’s weary creatures
Slept peacefully. The woods and untamed waters
Were still. The stars were halfway through their journeys
Above the tranquil fields. Cattle and bright birds
Of the broad lakes and brambly wilderness
All lay asleep beneath the noiseless sky,
Their troubles soothed, their sufferings forgotten—
But not the desolate Phoenician queen.
Her heart and eyes shunned darkness and the ease
Of sleep. Her torments thronged, her love ran wild,
Surged back and forth on seething tides of madness.
Her heart was churning with its endless questions:
“What should I do? Go back where I’ll be laughed at,
And beg to marry a Numidian prince

510–11–­
Erebus, Chaos . . . three
faces: Underworld deities; Hecate, the
three-­faced goddess of witchcraft, is associated with Diana.
512–­Avernus: The lake outside the
entrance to the Underworld.

510

515

520

525

530

535

517–18–­with sacred meal . . . one
sandal off: Loosened clothing and bare
feet aid in the working of magic.
528–­The line is thought to be spurious.
535–­Numidian: African.

. 103 .

BOOK 4
After I turned those suitors all away?
Follow the Trojan ships and do whatever
The Trojans order? Surely they’ll recall
The help I gave and, for the past’s sake, help me.
Yet—were I willing—would they let the outcast
On their proud ships? Poor fool, you’re not familiar
With treachery in Laomedon’s descendants?
Would I dog cheering sailors all alone
And leave my people? Or take Tyrian ranks
As escorts? Would those barely torn from Sidon
Endure another sea voyage on my orders?
No, die—you’ve earned it. Give the sword your sorrow.
But you, my sister, weakened by my tears,
Turned folly to disaster and defeat.
I couldn’t live a blameless life, unmarried,
Like a wild thing, and spared this agony.
I broke my promise to the dead Sychaeus.”
Out of her heart these words of sorrow broke.
On the high stern, Aeneas was asleep,
In confidence that everything was ready,
When in a dream he saw the god again:
Mercury’s face and coloring were there,
His yellow hair and handsome young man’s body.
The image spoke the warning once again:
“You sleep, child of the goddess, while disaster
Teeters unseen, and dangers lurk around?
Fool, can’t you hear the opportune West Winds?
The woman, who now knows her death is coming,
Is tossed in heaving, scheming tides of rage.

542–­
treachery in Laomedon’s de­
scendants: The Trojan ancestor Laomedon swindled the gods Apollo and Neptune out of their payment after they had
built the walls of Troy. See also 3.476n.

540

545

550

555

560

545–­Sidon: A city in Phoenicia,
Dido’s homeland.

. 104 .

BOOK 4
Bolt from here headlong, while you have the chance,
Or you’ll see storms of wreckage and the glare
Of brutal torches. Flames will fill the beach
If the dawn finds you loiter in this land.
Be quick and go! A woman is a changing,
A fitful thing.” The form ebbed into black night.
The sudden vision of this chilling shade
Ripped him from sleep. He shook his comrades too.
“Wake—now!—and take your places on the benches.
Hurry! Unfurl the sails. Once more from heaven
A god’s come, driving our escape: start cutting
The twisted ropes! We follow you, whichever
God you might be—again we hail your orders.
Be with us, guide us graciously, and bring us
Favoring stars.” He drew his flashing sword
And struck the mooring line. A single passion
Seized all of them. They ran and snatched their gear
And quit the beach. The level blue was hidden
By skimming ships. The oars raised twists of foam.
Dawn, risen from her husband’s saffron bed,
Was scattering her light across the world.
The sky grew white above the queen’s high tower.
Below, the ships went forward in a row.
The port, the shore were bare, the sailors gone.
Repeatedly she struck her lovely breast
And tore her blond hair. “Jupiter! He’s leaving?
A stranger comes—and goes—and mocks my power?
Why doesn’t the whole city arm and follow
In ships torn madly from their moorings? Hurry!
Bring torches, pass out arms, ram the oars forward!

569–70–­A woman is a changing, a
fitful thing: This quotation is sometimes
used misogynistically.
584–­her husband’s saffron bed: The

565

570

575

580

585

590

orange color of saffron makes it suitable
for the bed of the dawn goddess, but its
associations with marriage in Roman
culture highlight Dido’s abandonment.

. 105 .

BOOK 4
What? Where is this new madness taking me?
Poor thing. His crimes—you feel them only now?
You made him king. See what his word is worth!
They say he brought his household gods with him,
And hauled his frail old father on his shoulders.
I could have scattered the torn pieces of him
Across the waves. I could have killed his friends—
His son—and made a banquet for the father—
A struggle I might not have won—no matter:
I still would die. My torches should have swarmed
His camp and gangways till they made a pyre
For father, son, the whole race, and myself.
Come, Sun, the blazing lamp of all creation—
Juno, the witness and the go-­between—
And Hecate, a name shrieked at the crossroads—
Avenging Furies—and my own death demons:
Turn heaven’s justice where it should be turned.
This is my prayer now: If that living curse
Must skim his way to harbor in that country,
If Jove and fate require this to happen,
Then let a bold and warlike people drive him
Out of his realm and tear his Iulus from him.
Make him go beg for help and see the death
Of blameless friends. Degrading pacts won’t bring
The happy life he hoped for in his kingdom.
He’ll fall and lie unburied in the sand.

600–601–­scattered the torn pieces
of him across the waves: In imitation
of Medea, who scattered pieces of her
brother to slow down her father as he
pursued her.
602–­made a banquet for the father:
In imitation of Atreus who took revenge
on his brother Thyestes by serving his
children to him in a banquet.

595

600

605

610

615

620

615–29–­Then let a bold and warlike
people drive him . . . children: This is
Dido’s infamous curse, which anticipates
Hannibal.
617–­go beg for help: Aeneas begs for
assistance from the Greek king Evander
in Italy (book 8).

. 106 .

BOOK 4
And now, my last plea, gushing with my blood:
Tyrians, hound with hatred for all time
The race he founds. My ashes call from you
This service. Let there be no pacts of friendship.
Out of my grave let an avenger rise
To visit fire and sword on Trojan settlers—
Now—someday—when the power is there to strike.
Our shores will clash, weapons and seas collide.
My curse is war for Trojans and their children.”
She finished. Now her thoughts went everywhere,
Seeking the fastest way to leave the light.
She told the old nurse of Sychaeus, Barce
(Her own had died back in the fatherland),
“Darling, please bring my sister Anna—hurry!
Have her splash river water on her body
And bring the beasts and other offerings.
Cover your own brow with a reverent fillet.
I’ll now round out the ritual I started
For Jove below the earth, to end my pain,
And light the pyre that holds the Trojan’s life.”
Quickly the fond old woman hobbled off.
Now Dido’s own grim plans had made her frantic.
Her red eyes darted, and her cheeks were blotched
And shook—but she grew pale in facing death.
Frenzied, she reached the center of the house,
Climbed up the pyre and drew the Trojan sword—
A gift she’d begged, not meaning it for this.
Here she surveyed the bed she knew so well,
The Trojan clothes. In tearful contemplation
She lay a little while, and spoke these last words:
“Sweet leavings—while divine fate kept you sweet—
Receive my breath and free me from this pain.
I lived, I ran the race that fate allotted.
I’ll send the Underworld a noble ghost.
I saw the walls of my great city standing,

. 107 .

625

630

635

640

645

650

655

BOOK 4
Avenged my husband, made my brother pay.
A happy—no, a more than happy life,
If Trojan ships had never touched these shores.”
She kissed the bed. “I die without revenge—
But let me die. I like this path to darkness.
Let the cruel Trojan’s eyes take in these flames.
The omen of my death will go with him.”
Her maids now saw her falling on her sword,
Still speaking, saw her blood foam down the blade
And fleck her hands. A shout rose to the rooftop,
And through the shaken city Rumor raged.
Long-­drawn-­out shrieks of grief and women’s keening
Brimmed from the buildings. Anguish filled the sky,
As if invading troops brought Carthage down—
Or ancient Tyre were sacked—and flames were scaling
The rooftops of the houses and the temples.
Her sister heard and ran to her in panic,
Clawing her cheeks, bruising her breast with blows.
Plunging straight through the crowds, she called that doomed
name.
“This was your purpose, sister—to deceive me?
The pyre, the flames, the altars bring me this?
How could you leave me like a cast-­off thing
And go alone, and not take me along?
One sword, one hour, one agony for both!
I piled the wood, I called our fathers’ gods
To let you lie alone here, heartless monster?
You killed yourself and me, your city’s people,
And the Phoenician lords. Come, give me water
To wash these wounds—and if a last breath hovers,
My mouth will take it.” She had climbed the pyre,
And held her sister now, that fading life,
658–­
If Trojan ships had never
touched these shores: Vergil reworks

660

665

670

675

680

685

Medea’s wish about the Argonauts in
Ennius’ play Medea.

. 108 .

BOOK 4
And moaned and mopped the black blood with her clothes.
Dido now strained to lift her heavy eyes
But failed. Around the sword, her breast’s wound hissed.
Three times she rose a little, on her elbow,
Collapsed each time, and with her wandering vision
Searched for the bright high sky and sighed to find it.
Queen Juno cut her torture short, in pity,
Dispatching Iris earthward from Olympus
To free the struggling spirit from its bonds.
There was no fate or justice in her death.
Her madness brought a wretched early end,
Proserpina had cut no lock of blond hair
To dedicate this life to Stygian Orcus,
So dewy Iris swooped on saffron wings,
Trailing a thousand sun-­reflecting colors,
And floated near her head. “I am to take
This gift to Dis and free you from your body.”
Her right hand made the stroke. All living heat
Vanished, and life dissolved into the wind.

694–­Iris: Goddess of the rainbow, a
messenger of the gods.
698–99–­Proserpina had cut no lock
. . . to Stygian Orcus: Proserpina, queen

690

695

700

705

of the Underworld, snips a lock of hair
from the dying to offer to Pluto (Orcus);
as Dido’s death is unexpected, Iris must
snip it instead.

. 109 .
