Aeneas staunchly voyaged out with his fleet,
Cutting the waves the driving North Wind darkened.
He saw behind him poor Elissa’s fire,
A huge glow in the fort—but what had caused it
The Trojans couldn’t tell. Yet what they knew
Of woman’s rage from ruined love’s hard grief
Gave them a grim foreboding in their hearts.
They sailed the open water; no land met them,
Yet everywhere were sea and sky alone.
But then a purple-­black light-­stifling storm
Came swooping down. Night bristled on the water.
On the high stern, the pilot Palinurus
Himself cried, “These huge thunderheads that wrap
The sky—what are you doing, Father Neptune?
Row hard and pull the tackle in,” he ordered.
He sloped the sails against the wind and added,
“No hope for Italy in such foul weather,
Not even if Jove promised, brave Aeneas.
The black west sends a rising, roaring wind
Into our side. Air thickens into cloud.
We haven’t got the strength to fight against it.
Fortune has triumphed, and we must submit,
Turning our course her way. We near the havens
Of Sicily and your loyal brother Eryx,
If I recall the stars I traced in coming.”
24–­Eryx: Half-­brother of Aeneas by
Venus, after whom a city and mountain
in Sicily are named.

. 110 .

5

10

15

20

25

BOOK 5
Steadfast Aeneas answered, “I have watched you
Struggling against insistent winds and losing.
Shift the sails, turn. There’s no land I prefer
To send these tired ships to than the one
That keeps for me Dardanian Acestes
And holds my father’s bones in its embrace.”
They sought the port. Favoring West Winds hurried
The fleet’s stretched sails across the deep. They turned
At last toward welcome and familiar beaches.
Startled to see them from a far-­off peak,
Acestes rushed to greet the kindred ships.
Child of a Trojan mother and the river
Crinisus, he now wore rough Libyan bearskin
And carried sharp spears. Mindful of his lineage,
He happily received his weary friends
As guests again, in rustic luxury.
The stars were routed by the brightening dawn.
From the long beach Aeneas called his comrades
Together and addressed them from a raised mound:
“Descendants of high gods, heroic Trojans,
One circling year is full, its months completed,
From when we laid my honored father’s bones
In the ground and consecrated his sad altar.
This seems to be the bitter day the gods
Decreed that I commemorate forever.
If I were exiled in Gaetulian Syrtes,
Or caught by storms and captive in Mycenae,
30–­Dardanian Acestes: A Trojan
leader who has settled in Sicily; he is
called Dardanian after Dardanus, the
Italian ancestor of the Trojans.
46–­One circling year is full: A year
has passed since the end of book 3, when
the Trojans buried Anchises on this shore.

30

35

40

45

50

51– ­Gaetulian Syrtes: Dangerous
sandbanks near Carthage in North
Africa, where the Gaetuli lived.
52–­Mycenae: A major Greek city, the
home of Agamemnon.

. 111 .

BOOK 5
Still I would carry out these solemn rites
And pile the altar with the proper gifts.
But here we are now, at a friendly port,
And in the bones’ and ashes’ very presence.
It must have been the gods’ will that achieved this.
So let us all be glad in this observance,
Ask for good winds, and pray he’ll grant this rite
Each year in our new city, in his own shrine.
Acestes, who was born at Troy, will give you
Two oxen for each ship. Invite our home gods,
Our country’s, and our host’s to share the feast.
But when the ninth dawn brings the nurturing day
To mortals, and its beams light up earth’s circle,
I’ll hold a race for speedy Trojan ships.
Strong runners, too, and hardy, confident
Masters of javelins and buoyant arrows,
Any bold boxers with their rawhide thongs
Can step up. There are prizes for the winners.
Place garlands on your heads, in holy silence.”
He hid his forehead in his mother’s myrtle.
Helymus did the same, and old Acestes,
And also young Ascanius and his peers.
With a great crowd of soldiers for an escort,
Aeneas left the conclave for the grave mound.
There on the ground he poured two ritual cups
Each of unmixed wine, fresh milk, holy blood,
And scattered purple flowers. “Hallowed father,
I call unceasingly to your poor spirit,

59–­this rite: Aeneas is credited with
founding the Roman festival of Parentalia, which honors family ancestors.
72–­
his mother’s myrtle: Myrtle is
sacred to Venus.

55

60

65

70

75

80

73–­Helymus: Son of Anchises, half-­
brother of Aeneas.

. 112 .

BOOK 5
Your ghost: the body that I saved is ashes.
I couldn’t seek with you our fated lands
In Italy, and a river called the Tiber.”
Then from beneath that holy site there slipped
A giant snake, who drew his seven coils
Gently around the barrow and the altar.
His back was blazoned blue, and gold-­flecked scales
Kindled and glowed, as when a rainbow catches
The sun, and myriad colors strike the clouds.
Aeneas was amazed. It stretched its great length
Among the bowls and polished cups. It tasted
The dishes and slid back beneath the tomb
Harmlessly from the banquet on the altar.
The son resumed the rites with greater fervor.
Was this the place’s spirit? Or his father’s
Attendant? Now he sacrificed two sheep,
Two sows, and two black bullocks, poured out wine,
And called upon the soul of great Anchises,
The ghost that Acheron had now released.
With a good will each comrade brought the gifts
That he could spare, killed bulls, and heaped the altar.
Others lined cauldrons up and then stretched out
On the grass to roast the spitted meat on coals.
The long-­awaited ninth day came. The horses
Of Phaethon brought dawn in pleasant weather.
The fame of glorious Acestes drew
The eager neighboring tribes. They filled the shore
To see Aeneas’ men—or challenge them.

82–83–­our fated lands in Italy, and
a river called the Tiber: Aeneas is only
vaguely aware of his destination.

85

90

95

100

105

99–­Acheron: A river in the Underworld.
105–­Phaethon: Here the sun, literally
“shining one.”

. 113 .

BOOK 5
At the start, the center of the field displayed
The prizes for the winners: sacred tripods,
Garlands, palm branches, clothing dyed with purple,
Along with massive bars of gold and silver.
From a mound, a trumpet’s blare began the games.
For the first contest, four ships, closely matched,
With heavy oars were chosen from the fleet.
Mnestheus took the Whale, with its keen rowers
(In Italy, the Memmian clan is his),
And Gyas the Chimera’s hulking mass,
A town’s size, rearing triple banks of oars
And driven forward by the youth of Troy.
Sergestus, father of the Sergian house,
Rode the vast Centaur; sky-­blue Scylla carried
Cloanthus: the Cluentii are his.
In open sea, far from the foaming shore,
A rock lies, sometimes sunk in swollen waves
When the northeastern storms conceal the stars.
Now it rose quiet from the tranquil water,
Its flat top welcome to the sunning gulls.
Father Aeneas set a leafy oak branch
Out there to show the sailors where to turn
And bend their lengthy courses back again.
They drew for starting places, and the captains
Stood on the sterns in glowing gold and purple.
The young men in the crews wore poplar garlands.
Their shoulders glistened with the oil rubbed on.
They sat and took a tight grip on their oars,
109–10–­the center of the field dis­
played the prizes for the winners: The
games for Anchises are modeled on the
funeral games for Patroclus in Iliad 23.
116–23–­Mnestheus . . . Cluentii: The
key racers are ancestors of powerful Roman families of Vergil’s time.

110

115

120

125

130

135

118–­Chimera: Named for the fire-­
breathing monster killed by the hero Bellerophon.
129–­Father Aeneas: Aeneas takes on
the leadership role more fully after his
father’s death.

. 114 .

BOOK 5
Keen for the signal; throbbing trepidation,
Hot greed for praise clutched at their leaping hearts.
The trumpet blared, and instantly they sprang
Over the line. Their shouting struck the sky.
Their arms drew back, they whipped the sea to foam.
The ships cut trenches in a row. The surface
Split with the force of oars and trident beaks.
Chariots never with such plunging speed
Poured from the gate and tore along the course,
Their drivers shaking free the waving reins
And bending forward to apply the whip.
Then the whole forest roared with the applause
Of partisans. The deep-­set bay sent voices
Rolling, the hills recoiled from pounding shouts.
First Gyas slipped ahead across the waves,
Beyond the crowded clatter. Then Cloanthus
Chased him, although the heavy pine hull hampered
His better crew. The Centaur and the Whale,
An equal space behind, fought for third place.
Now the Whale has it, now the giant Centaur
Passes him, now the two prows shoot in tandem,
While long salt furrows trail behind the hulls.
But now they neared the rock, their turning post.
Gyas, the halfway victor, kept the lead.
He shouted to Menoetes at the helm:
“Why are you headed so far right? Turn this way!
Keep to the shore! Your oars should graze the crags.
The rest can sail the sea.” But still Menoetes,
Who dreaded hidden rocks, swerved toward the deep.
“Where are you going? Toward the rocks, I said!”
Yelled Gyas. Looking back, he saw Cloanthus
Gaining—and circling closer to the shore,
Between his own ship and the sounding cliffs.
He scraped his way through, quickly passed the leader—
Beyond the turning post he reached safe waters.

. 115 .

140

145

150

155

160

165

170

BOOK 5
Fury flamed in the other captain’s young bones.
Tears on his cheeks, forgetting dignity
And safety, he threw circumspect Menoetes
Out of the lofty stern into the sea.
He took the helm himself now, as the pilot,
Urged on the men and swung the rudder shoreward.
Menoetes (in a while) escaped the sea floor,
Old as he was and hampered by his wet clothes.
He climbed the rock and settled on a dry ledge.
Trojans had laughed to see him fall and swim,
And now they laughed to see him spewing brine.
Sergestus and Mnestheus, who were last,
Were thrilled—they might pass Gyas as he lingered.
Sergestus pulled ahead—but it was only
By half a length—as he approached the rock.
Alongside skimmed the Whale’s competing prow.
Mnestheus paced amidships, rallying
His crew: “Heave! Throw your whole strength into it!
Comrades of Hector, allies whom I chose
In Troy’s last crisis: show the strength and courage
That served you at the sandbanks of the Syrtes,
Ionian seas, and savage Malean waves.
I don’t demand the glory of first place
(And yet—no, Neptune, you must choose the winner).
But last! Humiliation! That at least
We must avoid.” They made a flat-­out effort.
The bronze-­beaked ship was trembling with the blows.
The surface slipped away, the panting shook
Arms, legs, and dry mouths. Sweat flowed down in streams.
It was mere chance that brought the men their triumph.
193–­Malean waves: Cape Maleas, on
the southeastern coast of the Peloponnese, is treacherous for shipping.

. 116 .

175

180

185

190

195

200

BOOK 5
Sergestus in his fervor drove his prow
Close to the rock—an inside, risky passage—
And caught disastrously on jutting outcrops.
His oars struck those rough edges with a crunch.
The prow was rammed and hung above the water.
With shouts, the crew sprang up and steadied her,
And took out pointed rods and poles made stiffer
With iron to fish back their broken oars.
Mnestheus, even keener in his good luck,
With a swift sweep of oars, invoking winds,
Sped to the shore across the open water,
Like a dove startled from her darling nestlings
Hidden in crannies of a soft-­stone cave
That is her home. She bursts out with a clatter
Into the countryside, then coasts through air
That’s calm and clear, and stills her rapid wings.
Like her the Whale flew, on its own momentum,
And sliced the surface at the course’s end,
Leaving Sergestus struggling on a sharp rock
At first, then in the shallows as he yelled
For help and learned to make his way with split oars.
Still, he reached Gyas and the huge Chimera;
Robbed of its pilot, this one fell behind.
Only Cloanthus needed overtaking.
Mnestheus, with all his power, chased him.
The noise swelled on the shore, everyone clamored
For the ship in second place. The high air echoed.
The leader’s crew would have been mortified
To lose their victory, glory worth their lives!
The others’ strength was growing as they gained:
Now neck and neck, they might have won together,
Had not Cloanthus, arms held toward the sea,
Poured out this prayer and made the gods this promise:
“Hear, ocean’s rulers, on whose plain I move:

. 117 .

205

210

215

220

225

230

235

BOOK 5
To pay my vow as victor on the shore,
I’ll set a snow-­white bull before your altar,
And give your salt waves flowing wine and entrails.”
In the deep current all the Nereids heard,
All Phorcus’ troupe, and virgin Panopea.
The father, God of Ports, pushed with his huge hand;
The ship shot past the speed of wind or arrows
And bolted to the deep protecting harbor.
Anchises’ son then duly told the herald
To call the people and announce Cloanthus
The winner. A fresh bay wreath hid his temples.
Aeneas let each crew divide the prizes:
Three heifers, wine, a hundredweight of silver.
Particular awards were for the captains:
The winner got a gold cloak, with two waves
Of Meliboean purple on its border,
Ganymede woven in, on leafy Ida,
A fierce-­speared runner-­down of speedy stags,
Panting like life—but now caught up on high
In the hooked claws of Jove’s swift armor-­bearer.
His aged minders reached up helplessly
To the stars, and dogs bayed, menacing the air.
The man whose skill had gained him second place
Got a gold breastplate, triple-­meshed and polished;
Aeneas’s spoil from Demoleos beaten

239–41–­Nereids . . . Phorcus . . .
Panopea . . . God of Ports: Oceanic
deities. Phorcus is an old man of the sea.
Panopea is a Nereid, or sea nymph. Portunus was the God of Ports.
246–­bay wreath: A symbol of victory in athletic and artistic competition;
in Rome, it was awarded to generals in
military parades called triumphs.
251–­Meliboean purple: A rich red-­

240

245

250

255

260

purple. The dye was extracted from sea
snails.
252–­Ganymede . . . Ida: The Trojan
prince Ganymede was abducted from
Mount Ida near Troy by Jupiter: see
1.28n.
255–­hooked claws: Of the eagle,
Jupiter’s bird.
260–­Demoleos: A Greek warrior at
Troy, killed on the battlefield there.

. 118 .

BOOK 5
Near rushing Simoïs under towering Troy.
The battle refuge graced another man now—
Two servants, Sagaris and Phegeus,
Staggered beneath its layered weight. Demoleos
Had worn it running after Trojan stragglers.
The third prize was a pair of matched bronze caldrons,
And solid silver cups, rugged with carvings.
And while the victors swaggered in the thrill
Of rich rewards, red ribbons on their heads,
Sergestus reached the shore. He’d worked his hull free
From the cruel rock, lost his oars, and bashed a row
Of oarlocks useless. He won only laughter.
His ship was like a snake caught on the road’s edge,
Cut across by a bronze wheel or left mangled
And half-­dead by a traveler’s heavy stone.
It tries to whip away, but this is hopeless—
The hissing, arching head and burning eyes
Are held back by the crippled part that knots
The struggling creature back upon itself.
Like this the ship moved, with its ruined oars;
And yet it reached the port with full-­spread sails.
Aeneas, happy that the crew and vessel
Were saved, gave to Sergestus what he’d promised:
A Cretan slave girl, Pholoë, nursing twins,
And skillful at Minerva’s weaving work.
Righteous Aeneas, at this contest’s end,
Strode toward the grassy field that was surrounded
By wooded hills, a natural stadium
For a racetrack. Thousands trailed behind the hero.
Seated amid the stands there on a platform,
He offered prizes to entice the daring
285–­Minerva’s weaving work: Mi‑
nerva is the patron of crafts, especially
weaving.

. 119 .

265

270

275

280

285

290

BOOK 5
Of anyone considering the footrace.
Competitors converged—Trojans, Sicilians—
First Nisus and Euryalus;
Euryalus a handsome, blooming youth
Whom Nisus loved devotedly. Diores
Came next, a prince of Priam’s peerless bloodline;
Then Salius, an Acarnanian;
And Patron, an Arcadian Tegean;
In old Acestes’ cohort, Helymus
And Panopes, youths from Sicilian woodlands;
And many more, obscure, unknowable.
Aeneas, in the center of them, spoke:
“I know you’ll be delighted when you hear this:
No one will leave without a gift from me.
Two spearheads of bright iron, worked in Crete,
And a two-­headed ax embossed in silver
Will honor everyone. But olive leaves
Of tawny green will crown the fastest three.
The winner gets a horse with handsome trappings,
The next an Amazonian quiver full
Of Thracian arrows, with a wide gold strap
Whose buckle is a solid polished gem.
This Argive helmet must content the third.”
The runners took their places. At the signal,
They sprang across the line and down the course,
Pouring like clouds. Now with the goal in sight,
Nisus flashed out ahead and took the lead
As swiftly as the wind or wings of thunder.
The next, but with a lengthy gap before him,

294–­Nisus and Euryalus: A warrior
couple modeled on Homeric and Platonic ideals. They will appear again at
9.174–449.

295

300

305

310

315

320

311–12–­
Amazonian quiver full of
Thracian arrows: The Amazons were
known for their skill at archery; Thracians were considered especially fierce
and warlike.

. 120 .

BOOK 5
Was Salius; Euryalus came third,
Some distance back.
Helymus followed him, and right behind
Diores sped—his foot brushed on a heel,
His shoulder loomed. And had the track been longer
He would have slipped ahead or tied for fourth.
But as they came exhausted to the last stretch,
Poor Nisus skidded on some slippery blood
That had poured out and wet the grassy ground
When, as it happened, steers were slaughtered there.
Already thrilled with victory, the young man
Couldn’t secure his step, and staggered, fell
Face-­first in filthy dung and sacred blood.
But with his dear Euryalus in mind,
He lurched up from the muck—in Salius’ way.
A rapid somersault laid him on hard sand.
Through his friend’s help, Euryalus flashed by
And flew in first, with roaring crowds to greet him.
Helymus came in next, Diores third.
Through the whole vast arena, where the elders
Watched from the front, the yells of Salius rang,
Demanding the award a foul had stolen.
The crowd, though, backed Euryalus’ shy tears—
And the great beauty of his budding manhood.
Diores helped him with his own loud protests:
He’d won the third prize, but it would be void
If Salius was now to have the first.
Father Aeneas answered: “All your prizes
Are safe, boys: nobody will change the order.
But I can soothe a friend who’s been unlucky.”
To Salius he gave a lion’s pelt
From Libya: huge, heavy-­maned, and gold-­clawed.
But Nisus said, “If that’s what losers get,
And accidents win pity, what’s for me?
I deserved first prize, and I would have won it,

. 121 .

325

330

335

340

345

350

355

BOOK 5
But for the same bad luck that Salius had.”
He gestured to the wet dung on his face
And body. The good father of the Trojans
Laughed and had fetched a shield that Didymaon
Had made—Greek spoil from Neptune’s holy door—
A splendid gift for this outstanding youth.
When all of this was done, Aeneas said:
“Whoever has staunch ready manhood in him,
Let him step up and bind and raise his fists.”
He set out two more prizes: for the winner,
A bull with gilded horns and hanging ribbons;
A sword and splendid helmet, loser’s solace.
Unhesitating, Dares thrust his jaw out
And rose in all his strength. The whole crowd murmured.
He alone had been used to fighting Paris;
He’d crushed the champion, huge Butes (boasting
Lineage from Bebrycian Amycus)
And laid him out to die on tawny sand
Beside the tomb where peerless Hector rested.
Such a man reared his towering head to fight,
Showed his wide shoulders, shot out first one arm
And then the other, hammering the air.
The second boxer? Out of that whole crowd,
No one dared wrap his hands in thongs to face him.
Thinking they were conceding him the prize,
He took a happy stand below Aeneas.
His left hand gripped the bull’s horn, and he spoke:
“So, goddess’ son, if no one’s brave enough,
How long exactly should I stand here waiting?
Tell me to take my prize.” All of the Trojans

359–­Didymaon: Not otherwise
known.
366–­ribbons: See 2.133n.

360

365

370

375

380

385

372–­Lineage from Bebrycian Amy­
cus: Amycus, king of the savage Bebryces, forced strangers to box with him for
their lives.

. 122 .

BOOK 5
Roared for the man to have the promised trophy.
Acestes was disgruntled with Entellus,
Who sat beside him on a bench of green turf:
“You were the strongest—once. What use is that?
You’ll let this splendid prize be snatched away
Without a fight? What good is godlike Eryx
You claim as teacher? What about your fame
Throughout this land, the prizes on your walls?”
Entellus shot back: “It’s not fear defeating
My lust for fame, but slow and freezing blood
Of old age, and my cold depleted strength.
If I were in my prime still, like that fellow—
So insolent, full of himself, cocksure—
I’d take my place, but not to win a fine bull.
Prizes don’t draw me.” Into the arena
He threw a pair of hugely heavy gauntlets
Whose hard hide savage Eryx used to wrap
Around his hands for every boxing battle.
The crowd gaped: riveted with lead and iron
To stiffen them were seven massive bulls’ hides.
Dares backed well away in stupefaction;
Anchises’ brave son turned them over, testing
The weight of those immense loops in his hands.
The veteran boxer spoke then, from his heart:
“What if we saw what Hercules himself wore
In the tough contest on this very beach?
Your brother Eryx had these on his hands once
(Look at the caked brains, and the spattered blood)
And faced that hero, and I used to wear them

387–­Entellus: Not otherwise known;
there was a city in Sicily called Entella.
401–5–­hugely heavy gauntlets . . .
seven massive bulls’ hides: Roman boxers protected their hands by wearing the

390

395

400

405

410

leather caestus, which extended from the
knuckles up the forearm.
410–­Hercules: Aeneas’ half-­brother
Eryx was killed by Hercules in a wrestling match.

. 123 .

BOOK 5
In my strong-­blooded years, when jealous old age
Had not yet sowed the white hairs on my temples.
If Dares, though, demurs, and good Aeneas
Chooses, and if Acestes my supporter
Agrees, we’ll make it fair and take away
Eryx’ straps and your Trojan ones—don’t worry.”
He dropped his cloak of double thickness, stripping
The body with the massive joints, bones, arms,
And took his hulking stand in the arena.
Anchises’ son, the father, brought out matched thongs
And bound the hands of both with equal weapons.
They didn’t pause but faced off, on their toes,
Fearless, alert, their hands up in the air.
Their heads were reared far back and out of range.
Fists tangled, sparred, and sought an opening.
The one was younger, quicker on his feet,
The other stronger, larger, but his knees
Faltered, and weary panting shook his bulk.
Often they missed in swinging at each other,
But often loudly thumped against a chest
Or curved-­in side; fists darted around temples
And ears, jaws crackled under stony blows.
Entellus’ feet were rooted in position—
But sharp eyes kept his body swaying, dodging.
Dares, as if he stormed a city’s bulwarks
Or kept a mountain fortress under siege,
Scanned thoroughly and shrewdly for a gap,
And drove assaults from everywhere—for nothing.
Entellus sprang and thrust his right arm up,
Then down. His quick opponent saw it falling,
Instantly slipped aside, and wasn’t there.
Entellus spilled his strength into the air.
The force of his own vast weight sent him crashing
Like a hollow pine tree torn up at the roots

. 124 .

415

420

425

430

435

440

445

BOOK 5
On Erymanthus or the heights of Ida.
Trojans, Sicilians, on their feet, were yelling
Clear to the sky. Acestes, though, his agemate
And friend, ran up and lifted him in pity.
But the fall didn’t slow or cow the hero,
Who came back fiercer, stronger in his anger
And searing shame, self-­conscious in his courage.
Over the whole arena he pitched Dares.
He battered with his right hand, then his left,
Not letting up. Like clouds that pound the rooftops
With hail, the hero pummeled his opponent
Ceaselessly with both fists and sent him spinning.
Father Aeneas now was moved to check
The savage anger of Entellus, ending
The fight—a rescue for exhausted Dares—
And did it with these sympathetic words:
“Poor friend, where has your mind gone? Don’t you sense
Some strength here more than his? Gods are against you:
Relent.” He caused the boxers to be parted.
Staunch comrades led the loser to the ships.
His head lolled, and he dragged his crippled knees.
He spat out broken teeth and clotted blood.
Others were called to claim his sword and helmet,
Leaving the bull and garland for Entellus.
The victor, full of heady pride, proclaimed:
“Son of the goddess, and you other Trojans:
Think of the strength I had when I was young—
Think of the death from which you just saved Dares.”
Before the young bull waiting as a prize
The boxer stood and faced him. Looming high
449–­Erymanthus: A mountain in
Arcadia, famous for its monstrous wild
boar, which Hercules slew.

. 125 .

450

455

460

465

470

475

BOOK 5
He aimed a hard-­bound hand between the horns,
Shattered the creature’s skull, and splashed its brains out.
Shaking in death, it crumpled and collapsed,
And over it he spoke these fervent words:
“Eryx, I give to you this better soul
Than Dares’—and unbind my hands forever.”
Soon after this, Aeneas sought contestants
For soaring archery and set out prizes.
His brawny hands took from Serestus’ ship
The mast and planted it and tied a dove—
The target—to a rope looped through the top.
In a bronze helmet rivals tossed their lots.
Hippocoön, the son of Hyrtacus,
Was chosen, to warm cheers, to take the first turn.
Next was Mnestheus, who’d won the ship race
And his bright olive crown; Eurytion
Was third—your brother, famous Pandarus,
Who broke the truce on orders from a god
And launched a weapon at the warrior Greeks.
Acestes’ was the last lot in the helmet—
He dared to try the work of younger men.
Now each one took an arrow from his quiver
And bent his curving bow with burly arms.
An arrow first soared off the twanging string
Of Hyrtacus’ son, sliced the air in two,
And hit the wooden mast straight on and lodged.
The pole shook, and the terrified dove flapped,
And the whole valley echoed with applause.
Now fierce Mnestheus stood and drew his weapon
And aimed high, straining both his bow and eyes.
495–­Pandarus: A Trojan archer who
broke the ceasefire during the duel between Menelaus and Paris in Iliad 4.

. 126 .

480

485

490

495

500

505

BOOK 5
Too bad! The steel tip failed to reach the bird,
But broke the knotted linen string that tethered
The creature by the foot atop the mast.
She sped off toward the storm clouds in the south.
Eurytion had drawn his bow already;
He quickly aimed, while praying to his brother.
With joy and clapping wings she’d reached the free sky
Beneath the clouded darkness, when he shot her.
She fell and left her life among the stars,
But brought to earth again the piercing arrow.
Acestes’ chance was gone—he still let fly
An arrow to the upper air, which showed
His bow-­resounding skill, though he was old.
An omen flashed—its meaning the great outcome
Proved in the time to come, when fearsome prophets
Chanted of signs that lagged in their fulfillment.
The arrow soared in flame through flowing clouds,
Burning a path that faded out and tattered
In breezes: thus a star that’s been dislodged
Crosses the sky and trails its hair behind it.
Both Trojans and Sicilians were astonished
And begged the gods to keep them safe. Aeneas
The great revered the omen and embraced
Happy Acestes, heaped on gifts, and spoke:
“Accept these, Father, since Olympus’ great king
Has marked you out for some supreme distinction.
This embossed bowl, a precious gift from Cisseus,
Keepsake and token of a loving friendship,
Belonged to my own father, old Anchises.”

514–­his brother: Pandarus: see
5.495n.
522–­
An omen flashed: The omen
may portend the greatness of Acestes and
his city Segesta.

510

515

520

525

530

535

535–­Cisseus: Father of Hecuba, the
wife of Priam.

. 127 .

BOOK 5
He ringed Acestes’ head with verdant laurel
And named him winner over all the others.
Eurytion—fine boy—did not resent it,
Though he’d brought down the bird. The next gifts went
To the rope’s breaker; then the one whose winging
Arrow had pierced the mast got his reward.
Father Aeneas didn’t end the games
Till he had called Epytides, dear tutor
Of little Iulus. To this trusty man
He whispered, “Go and tell Ascanius,
If he’s drawn up the squad of boys on horses,
To lead it out, for his grandfather’s sake,
And put his armed maneuvers on display.”
Aeneas had the field, in its long circuit,
Cleared—people had been pouring onto it.
Before their fathers’ eyes, the boys filed in,
Gleaming on bridled horses. Both Sicilians
And Trojans buzzed approval at their coming.
A ritual trimmed chaplet bound each boy’s head;
Each had a pair of steel-­tipped cornel spears;
Some had smooth quivers. From their necks hung circles
Of pliant gold that twisted at their throats.
Three troops of riders, each one with its leader,
Wove their way; twelve boys in each double file
Followed their captains in a neat division.
One young glad line was led by little Priam,
Polites’ son (bright bearer of a great name
One father back), who’d sire new Italians.
His Thracian horse was dappled, with white pasterns;
The forehead that it reared was splashed with white.
Iulus’ beloved agemate led the next squad,
545–­Epitydes: Periphas, son of Epytus, from Homer, Iliad 17.

540

545

550

555

560

565

551–­the field, in its long circuit: It
resembles the Circus Maximus in Rome.

. 128 .

BOOK 5
Atys, the Latin Atii clan’s forebear;
Iulus, best-­looking of the boys, came last.
His mount was Tyrian; shining Dido gave it
To be his own, for loving memory’s sake.
The other boys were on Sicilian horses,
The gifts of old Acestes.
The Trojans cheered their shy sons and were happy
To see ancestral faces replicated.
In joy they passed the crowd, their families watching.
The line paused. From the side, Epytides
Signaled, first with a shout and then a whip crack.
Now the three squads, each in two columns, wheeled
Apart to right and left. Another signal:
They turned back, aiming weapons at each other.
Then they made other moves and countermoves,
Faced off at distances and overlapped
In rings, and acted out armed skirmishes.
They fled, their backs defenseless, turned their spears
For an attack, then rode together, peaceful.
Like high Crete’s fabled labyrinth that wove
Its baffling paths within its blinding walls,
With countless tricks to keep its captives lost,
Confusing any signs that might have led them—
So was the Trojan sons’ game as they wove
A running pattern, mock attacks and mock
Retreats, like dolphins playing in the waves
Cutting the Libyan or Carpathian straits.
When he was building Alba Longa’s walls,
Ascanius revived the battle pageant

569–­Atii: Augustus’ mother, Atia,
was a member of the Atian family, or Atii.
588–­
Crete’s fabled labyrinth: The
maze designed by the inventor Daedalus
to imprison the Minotaur.

570

575

580

585

590

595

595–­Carpathian: Of the island Carpathus, between Crete and Rhodes.

. 129 .

BOOK 5
And taught the ancient Latins to perform it,
As he had done with fellow Trojan youngsters.
The Albans passed it down. Rome in her glory
Is heir to this ancestral ritual.
The boys are “Troy” and their formation “Trojan.”
With this, the honored father’s games concluded.
Now, in a fresh turn, Fortune changed allegiance.
While all these sports were offered to the tomb,
Juno the child of Saturn sent down Iris
To the Trojan fleet, and sped the wind behind her,
Plotting to satisfy her long-­held rancor.
Over the thousand colors of the rainbow
The goddess swiftly skimmed, and no one saw her.
Beyond the crowd, she passed along the shore
And saw the fleet left empty in the port.
The Trojan women stood and mourned Anchises
On a lonely beach. They gazed out at the deep
In tears, and all deplored how many seas
Remained to cross—how it exhausted them!
“A city! Not the sufferings of voyages!”
Iris, skilled meddler, slipped among the mothers
Of Troy, and she exchanged the face and clothing
Of a goddess for the form of Beroë,
The long-­lived wife of Doryclus of Tmaros.
Well known and nobly born, she’d been a mother.
“Wretches,” cried Iris, “not dragged off to death
By warring Greeks beneath your city’s walls!
What doom does Fortune keep for our poor people?
The seventh summer since Troy’s fall is passing.
Driven from star to star across the seas,
601–­this ancestral ritual: The “Troy
game,” an equestrian display performed
by Roman youths of noble birth, was re-

600

605

610

615

620

625

vived by Julius Caesar and brought into
regular practice by Augustus.

. 130 .

BOOK 5
The whole world’s lands and wrecking rocks, we’re wave-­tossed
On the great gulf. Italy retreats from us.
Now our own Eryx’ land, our host Acestes
Must let us found a city of our own.
Fatherland! Gods we saved from war for nothing!
What walls will have Troy’s name? Where will I see
A Simoïs and Xanthus, Hector’s rivers?
So come, let’s burn these ships that brought such sorrow.
In a dream, I saw the prophetess Cassandra;
She gave me burning torches: ‘Find your Troy here—
This is your home.’ Now is the time to act—
Quickly, on such great signs. Here are four altars
Of Neptune. He will give us fire and courage.”
She was the first to seize destroying flames.
She raised a torch and waved it. Then she strained
And threw it as the Trojan women watched
In horror. But the oldest of them, Pyrgo,
The nurse of Priam’s many children, shouted,
“Mothers, this isn’t Rhoetean Beroë,
Doryclus’ wife! Look at the godly splendor
Shown in her burning eyes, her haughtiness,
Her face, the way her voice sounds, and her gait.
And I myself have just left Beroë
Sick, and upset that she alone was missing
Her portion in these honors for Anchises.”
So she spoke.
The matrons didn’t know what they should do.
They glowered at the boats, in bitter yearning
To stay, yet thinking of the fated kingdom.
But as she fled on even wings, the goddess
Cut a great rainbow underneath the clouds.
632–­Gods: The Penates. See 1.379n.
636–­the prophetess Cassandra: see
2.346, 3.183–87.

. 131 .

630

635

640

645

650

655

BOOK 5
This apparition made the women shriek,
Frenzied. Some pillaged central hearths of buildings,
While others snatched up kindling, leaves—then torches
From altars. Over painted sterns and benches
And oars the god of fire ran amok.
Eumelus brought the news to the arena
Next to Anchises’ tomb; but on their own there,
Men saw a cloud of ashes surging skyward.
Ascanius capered at his squadron’s head—
But now his panting trainers couldn’t catch him:
He’d turned and galloped to the camp in riot.
“What are you doing? Have you lost your minds?
Poor Trojan women! It’s no hostile Greek camp
You’re burning, but your future. This is me,
Your own Ascanius!” At their feet he dashed
The helmet worn just now in that staged battle.
Aeneas rushed in, with a host of Trojans.
The women scattered, panicked, on the shore,
Then skulked away to trees and rocky hollows.
Shame drove them to the darkness; they awoke
To know their own and free their hearts from Juno.
And yet their raging fire didn’t slacken.
The caulking was alive beneath the wet wood,
Vomiting steady waves of smoke. Unyielding,
The flame of ruin ate the hulls, the whole ships;
The floods strong heroes hauled there couldn’t stop it.
Loyal Aeneas, clothes torn from his shoulders,
Begged for the gods’ help, stretching out his hands:
“Almighty Jove, unless you hate us Trojans
To the last man, and human suffering
Moves you no longer, let our fleet escape!
Save our exhausted race from ruin, Father!
Or hurl your thunderbolt of devastation
At what remains of us—if I deserve it.”
He’d scarcely finished when a monstrous black storm

. 132 .

660

665

670

675

680

685

690

BOOK 5
Broke in a rage of pouring rain and thunder.
The plains and mountains shook. The whole wild sky
Slid down in blackness through the whirling South Winds—
The decks filled up, the half-­burned wood was soaked—
And now the fire was completely out,
And all the ships but four were saved from ruin.
A hard blow for the patriarch Aeneas!
Tormented back and forth, he didn’t know
Whether to stay in these Sicilian fields,
Shirking his fate, or reach for Italy.
Old Nautes spoke, Tritonian Athena’s
Own chosen pupil, who was known for skill
In prophecies of what the forceful anger
Of gods would bring—he knew the links in fate’s chain.
He comforted Aeneas: “Venus’ son,
Staying or going, we must follow fate.
Whatever comes, endurance conquers fortune.
Here is Acestes, Trojan child of heaven.
Make plans with him—he’ll be a willing partner.
Leave him the lost ships’ orphans, leave him those
Exasperated by your great task’s hardships.
Spare the old men and ocean-­weary mothers,
And anyone who’s weak or shy of danger,
And let them rest and have their city here,
Named for Acestes, if he will allow it.”
The words of his old friend excited him,
But he was torn between anxieties.
Now black Night’s chariot had reached its zenith.
Father Anchises’ image came from there,
Descending suddenly, and poured these words out:
“My son, who more than my own life I cherished,
While I still lived: How Troy’s fate tortures you!
704–­Nautes: An ancestor of the elite
Roman family the Nautii.

695

700

705

710

715

720

725

704–­Tritonian Athena: Minerva was
born near the African lake Triton.

. 133 .

BOOK 5
Jove sent me—it was Jove who drove the fire
From your ships. The high god pities you at last.
Take Nautes’ good advice—his age and wisdom
Support it. Choose the staunchest men to voyage
To Italy. The race you must defeat there
Is tough and hardy. First, though, you must enter
The house of Dis below, cross deep Avernus,
And meet me—not in Tartarus’ cruel prison:
Lovely Elysium is now my home,
Where guiltless souls convene. Kill many black sheep,
To earn the virgin Sibyl as a guide
To where you’ll see your city and descendants.
Good-­bye. The dewy Night is at her turning.
Ah, the fierce breath of Dawn’s pursuing horses!”
He disappeared, like thin smoke in the air.
“Where have you gone so fast?” Aeneas cried,
“Who do you fear? Who keeps us from embracing?”
He roused the dozing fire, offered Troy’s
Home god and white-­haired Vesta in her shrine
Ritual flour and burned his store of incense.
He quickly called Acestes, then his comrades,
And told what Jove enjoined, what his dear father
Counseled, and what he now himself resolved.
Acestes, with no pause for talk, complied.
The matrons were enrolled, the city settled
With volunteers who had no urge for glory.
Crews small in number but alive with valor
Mended the benches and replaced the wood
The flames had gnawed. New oars and ropes were fitted.
732–­Dis: God of the Underworld.
732–­Avernus: Both the wood at the
entrance of the Underworld and, broadly,
the Underworld itself.
733–­
Tartarus’ cruel prison: The
Underworld’s area of punishment.

730

735

740

745

750

734–­Elysium: The realm of the
blessed.
736–­Sibyl: The Sibyl of Cumae.
744–­Home god . . . Vesta: Here, the
Lar (singular of Lares); and the female
god of the hearth.

. 134 .

BOOK 5
Aeneas plowed out borders, made allotments,
Named the town Ilium, the country Troy.
Trojan Acestes, pleased to rule, ordained
A forum and made rules for his new senate.
A shrine was laid out for Idalian Venus
On Eryx’ height. Anchises’ tomb was given
A spacious sacred grove, a priest appointed.
Now the whole tribe had sacrificed and feasted
For nine days. Peaceful winds smoothed out the sea:
The South Wind rose and called them toward the deep.
Along the winding shore rose noisy weeping.
All day, all night they clung in tight embraces.
Even the mothers, even those disgusted
At the word sea and at the sight of it,
Were keen for all the suffering of exile,
Kindly Aeneas soothed his friends. He wept,
Trusting them to Acestes, his relation.
He ordered three calves sacrificed to Eryx,
And to the Storms one lamb, before unmooring.
He wore an olive wreath and stood apart
In the prow to hold the bowl and pour clear wine
And offer entrails to the salty waves.
A following wind surged up against the stern.
Eager crews beat the sea and skimmed above it.
But meanwhile Venus, in her anguished worry,
Poured out these passionate complaints to Neptune:
“Juno’s hard anger and her ruthless heart
Force me to make humiliating pleas.
She yields to neither time nor loving duty.
757–58–­ordained a forum and made
rules for his new senate: Vergil uses Roman terminology.
759–­Idalian Venus: Idalia, on the
island of Cyprus, was a sanctuary of
Venus.

755

760

765

770

775

780

773–­Storms: This personification reflects the essentially animistic beliefs of
the Romans.

. 135 .

BOOK 5
Fate and Jove’s orders cannot break or halt her.
It didn’t satisfy her vicious hatred
To tear Troy from its people and devour it,
Or drag the bones and ashes of the city
Through all this—she must know why she’s so livid.
A while ago, you saw the towering storm
She raised off Africa. Through Aeolus’ whirlwinds,
She merged the world’s seas with the sky, brash meddling
In your domain—for nothing!
And see how wickedly she drove the mothers
Of Troy to burn the fleet, like criminals,
To strand the Trojans where they shouldn’t be.
Let the remainder spread their sails in safety
And cross to reach the Tiber at Laurentum—
If this can be, if the fates grant a city.”
Saturn’s son, tamer of the deep sea, spoke:
“Lady of Cythera, you rightly trust
My realm, where you were born, and I’ve been steadfast,
Crushing great rages of the sea and sky.
Even on dry land I protect Aeneas—
I call to witness Simoïs and Xanthus:
Achilles drove the panicked Trojan ranks
Against the walls. The river groaned with thousands
Of corpses—Xanthus couldn’t reach the sea.
Peleus’ son, for his part, had fierce strength
And gods’ help. In a saving cloud I hid
Aeneas, though I longed to ruin Troy:
I built it, but it broke its promises.
Don’t be afraid—I feel the same as then.
He’ll reach your chosen port beside Avernus.

797–­Laurentum: A city in Italy;
Aeneas will found the city of Lavinium
nearby.
799–­Saturn’s son: Neptune.

785

790

795

800

805

810

800–­Lady of Cythera: Venus.
808–10–­
Peleus’ son . . . Aeneas:
Achilles fought Aeneas until Aeneas was
rescued by his mother (Iliad 20).

. 136 .

BOOK 5
The sea will take just one for him to grieve for,
A single life for many.”
The patriarch had cheered and comforted
The goddess. Now he yoked his team in gold,
Bitted their foaming mouths, and gave them rein.
In his blue chariot he skimmed the sea.
Beneath the rumbling axle swelling waves
Spread even, and the savage clouds dispersed.
His suite, in all its forms, came with him: monsters,
Glaucus’ old troop, Palaemon son of Ino,
Tritons, swift Phorcus’ ranks, and on the left
Thetis, young Panopea, Melite, Spio,
Nesaeë, Thalia, and Cymodoce.
Sweet joy now overwhelmed the anxious thoughts
Of Father Aeneas, who had all the masts
Raised quickly and the yardarms draped with sails.
The crew lined up to set the sheets, released
The folds, first left, then right, and then maneuvered
The yards, and now a good breeze took the fleet,
And Palinurus led that crowded column:
The others were to set their course by him.
The dewy night was near its turning point
Above. The sailors sprawled, relaxed and peaceful,
Under the oars and on the rigid benches,
When Sleep slipped gently down from starry heaven,
Parting the dusky air and strewing shadows,
To bring grim dreams to guiltless Palinurus.
High on the stern Sleep sat, disguised as Phorbas,
And let these words come flowing from his mouth:
“Iasus’ son, the sea itself transports us.
The wind breathes evenly; it’s time to rest.
Lay down your head, steal shut your weary eyes,

841–­Phorbas: A fellow Trojan.

. 137 .

815

820

825

830

835

840

845

BOOK 5
And I myself will see your tasks are done.”
But Palinurus scarcely raised a glance.
“You’re telling me to trust the sea’s calm face
And peaceful waves? I know that it’s a monster.
It’s fooled me many times—should I entrust
Aeneas to the double-­dealing winds?”
He spoke, and gripped the helm, and wouldn’t yield it,
Unwavering in gazing at the stars.
But the god shook a branch, which dripped with dew
Of Lethe and the lulling power of Styx,
Over his temples, forced his swimming eyes shut.
The stealthy doze sank in, and he relaxed.
Sleep bent to pitch him, with the shattered helm
He clung to and its rudder, into clear waves.
His comrades didn’t hear the cries he gave.
Winged Sleep rose through the insubstantial air.
The fleet ran on in safety, undisturbed
And free of fear, as Father Neptune promised.
But now it drifted toward the Sirens’ cliffs—
A menace once, once white with heaps of bones—
From which rock-­pounding water sounded far off.
Father Aeneas felt the ship was drifting
Without its guide. He steered it through the night waves
Himself, with groans of anguish for his friend:
“Oh, trusting victim of calm sea and sky,
Unburied on some strange shore, Palinurus!”

855–­Lethe and the lulling power of
Styx: Two rivers in the Underworld;
Lethe was the river of forgetfulness.
864–­Sirens: Mythological singers,

850

855

860

865

870

part bird and part woman, who lure
ships to ruin, depicted tempting Odysseus in Odyssey 12.

. 138 .
