The trumpets gave a harsh blare. Turnus raised
The war sign from the tower of Laurentum,
And whipped his horses up, and clashed his weapons.
Instantly all of Latium joined in frenzy
And panic. Its young men grew cruel and savage.
The foremost leaders levied troops: Messapus,
Ufens, Mezentius the gods’ reviler
Stripped all the lands of farmers. Venulus,
Sent to ask help from Diomedes’ city,
Reported Trojans building homes in Latium,
Aeneas shipping in his conquered gods
And claiming fate had called him to be king;
And many peoples joined the Trojan fighter—
Far over Latium his renown was growing;
But Diomedes could discern more clearly
Than either King Latinus or King Turnus
His purpose and what he desired from victory.
Meanwhile, great waves of worries tossed the hero,
The son of Troy, at everything he saw.
His thoughts were darting one way, then another,
At every side of his perplexity,

2–­Laurentum: Latinus’ city, though
Turnus now seems to be acting as leader.
6–­Messapus: A king of Etruria, famous as a horse-­tamer.

5

10

15

20

9–­Diomedes’ city: Argyripa, also
called Arpi; Diomedes, a Greek warrior
at Troy, settled in Italy after the war.
11–­conquered gods: See 1.379n.

. 202 .

BOOK 8
Like shivering light reflected from the water
In bronze urns, from the sun or shining moon;
Flittering all around, then shooting upward
To strike the panels of the lofty ceiling.
Now it was night. Deep sleep held weary creatures
Throughout the earth, all kinds that walked and flew.
Under the tall cold sky beside the river
Father Aeneas, troubled by grim war,
Stretched out to give his body rest at last.
The old man Tiberinus, who was god there,
Appeared: out of the pleasant stream he rose
Through poplar leaves. A thin gray robe of linen
Covered his body, shady reeds his hair.
He spoke and took away Aeneas’ cares:
“Child of the gods who brings Troy back to us
From enemies, to keep its tower forever:
Laurentum’s earth and Latium’s fields await you;
They’re promised for your home and gods—persist!
Have courage, though war threatens. Heaven’s fury
Has all has drawn back.
But now, as proof this was no empty dream,
You’ll find a giant sow with thirty newborns
Lying beneath a holm oak on the bank:
White on the dark soil, white young at her teats.
The city will be there, and your sure rest.
In thirty circling years, Ascanius
Will found the city Alba—glorious name.
22–25–­Like shivering light . . . lofty
ceiling: Vergil has adapted this simile
from Apollonius, Argonautica 3, in which
it describes Medea’s fluttering heart.
31–­Tiberinus: The god of the river
Tiber.
43–­giant sow with thirty newborns:

25

30

35

40

45

This fulfills Helenus’ prophecy at 3.389–
92.
46–­This line is thought to be spurious.
48–­Alba: Vergil hints that Alba
Longa is so named for the white color of
the sow (Latin albus).

. 203 .

BOOK 8
I prophesy the truth. I’ll show you briefly
(So listen!) how to triumph in this crisis.
Arcadians, Pallas’ lineage in this land,
Followed their king Evander and his standards
And chose a hilly site and built their city,
Named Pallanteum for their ancestor.
They’ve been at constant war with Latium’s people.
Make them your allies, join them in a treaty.
I’ll lead you up the stream between my banks;
You’ll overcome the current, rowing inland.
Son of the goddess, come! While the first stars set,
Supplicate Juno, thwart her anger’s menace
With proper prayers and vows; and pay me honor
When you prevail. I am the brimming river
Grazing these banks and cutting through the rich fields,
The azure Tiber, stream the gods most favor.
My halls are here, my source among the high towns.”
The river vanished to his basin’s deep floor,
And sleep and night departed from Aeneas.
He stood and saw the heavenly light rising,
Piously cupped his hands, and lifted water
Out of the stream, with fervent words to heaven:
“Nymphs of Laurentum, who give birth to rivers,
And Father Tiber with your holy current,
Take me and keep me safe—at last—from danger.
Because you pity our distress, wherever
Your wellsprings gush out, filling you with glory,
I’ll worship you and honor you with gifts,
Horned king of all the waters of the West.
Only stay with me: prove your godly favor.”
51–54–­
Arcadians . . . Pallanteum:
Arcadians are Greeks descended from
Pallas, Evander’s great-­grandfather. Pal­

50

55

60

65

70

75

lanteum, the city they founded in Italy,
gives its name to Rome’s Palatine Hill.

. 204 .

BOOK 8
He spoke, and chose two biremes from the fleet,
Then oarsmen, and supplied his men with weapons.
But suddenly he saw among the trees
The wondrous portent: on the grassy bank
A white sow lay stretched out beside her white brood.
Devout Aeneas offered them all up
To you, majestic Juno, at your altar.
The Tiber flowed less swollen that whole night,
Checking its current, silencing its surges,
And smoothed its surface to the gentle peace
Of marshland so the rowers wouldn’t struggle,
And thus, with cheers, they sped along their way.
Greased fir slid through the shallows; woods and water
Wondered to see strange things: the warriors’ shields
Shining far off, and painted, swimming hulls.
The men wore out a day and night in rowing
Up the long bends. Trees of all kinds gave shelter,
And the keels cut the virid, still reflections.
The burning sun had climbed to its mid-­orbit
When they saw distant walls, a citadel,
Roofs of sparse homes—things Roman power now
Lifts heavenward; Evander’s poor domain then.
Quickly they turned their prows and neared the city.
That day it happened the Arcadian king
Honored great Hercules and other gods
Outside the city in a grove. His son
Pallas, young nobles, and the humble Senate
Stood by while incense burned, blood steamed at altars.

79–­biremes: A Greek warship with
two decks of oars.
103–­Hercules: Hercules defeated the
monster Cacus near Pallanteum, as described in 8.190–267.

80

85

90

95

100

105

105–­Pallas: Soon to be a close companion of Aeneas.
105–­Senate: Vergil assimilates Evander’s settlement to Rome.

. 205 .

BOOK 8
They saw tall ships come through the shady woods,
Gliding to shore, as rowers thrust, in silence.
The sudden sight alarmed the feasting men,
Who all stood up. “Don’t interrupt the rites!”
Pallas warned, snatched a spear, dashed toward the strangers.
From a far mound he cried, “Where are you heading
On unfamiliar roads? What is your bloodline?
Where do you come from?—and in peace or war?”
Father Aeneas answered from the high stern,
While holding out a branch of peaceful olive,
“We’re Trojan-­born, and we’re at war with Latins,
Who shamelessly attacked us fugitives.
Where is Evander? Tell him chosen leaders
From Troy have come to ask for an alliance.”
“Come ashore,” Pallas said, “though we don’t know you”—
Troy’s great name staggered him. “Speak to my father
Face to face. Be a guest-­friend in our household.”
He seized Aeneas’ hand and pressed it warmly.
They moved off from the bank into the woods.
Aeneas genially addressed the king:
“Best of men born from Greeks! Fortune has sent me,
A suppliant, to offer boughs with fillets—
Not dreading a Greek lord, Arcadian,
From the same stock as Atreus’ two sons.
No, my own rectitude, our common lineage,
The prophecies of gods, and your wide fame
Unite us, and I serve fate willingly.
Dardanus, sailing to the Teucrians,
Founded and fostered Troy. Greeks call him offspring
Of Electra, Atlas’ daughter—massive Atlas,
130–­Atreus’ two sons: Agamemnon
and Menelaus share ancestry with Evander via Maia, the mother of Mercury.
131–­our common lineage: Aeneas reminds Evander that he is related to the

110

115

120

125

130

135

Trojans too, via Dardanus and Mercury,
as explained in 131–42.
134–­Teucrians:–­See 1.235n.
136–­Electra: Sister of Maia.

. 206 .

BOOK 8
Who holds the globe in heaven on his shoulder.
Mercury was your forebear; snow-­white Maia
Gave birth to him on cold Cyllene’s summit.
If we can trust tradition, that same Atlas
Who hoists the constellations fathered Maia.
From the same blood, our families branch two ways.
This I relied on, and I used no legates
To test you slyly. Coming to your threshold,
I risked my life, a suppliant in person.
The Daunian race hounds both of us with cruel war.
They think they cannot fail, if they defeat us,
To place a tight yoke over all the West
And hold the seas that wash the north and south coasts.
Give me your pledge and take mine. Warlike spirits
Are ours, and soldiers proven sound by action.”
The whole time that Aeneas spoke, the king
Surveyed his eyes, his face, and all his form,
Then briefly answered: “Bravest of the Trojans,
I welcome you with joy, remembering
The words and voice and face of great Anchises.
Yes, Laomedon’s son Priam visited
Hesione his sister’s realm, then passed
From Salamis to cold Arcadia.
Youth’s early down was blooming on my cheeks.
The Trojan chieftains awed me, the prince Priam
Awed me; yet one strode higher than the rest,
Anchises, and I burned with boyish longing
Till I could greet the hero with a handclasp
And lead him to the town of Pheneus.
He gave me Lycian arrows when we parted,

139– ­Cyllene: A mountain in the
Peloponnese in Greece.
146–­Daunian race: Turnus’ Rutulians. Daunus was Turnus’s father.

140

145

150

155

160

165

166–­Lycian arrows: Lycians were
skilled as archers, so Lycian arrows were
especially valuable.

. 207 .

BOOK 8
A handsome quiver, and a cloak with gold threads
Woven in, and—my son’s now—twin gold bits.
My right hand makes the pledge you now desire,
And when the dawn returns to earth tomorrow,
You’ll go back cheered and helped by my resources.
Oblige us, meanwhile, since you come as friends,
And join our annual rite—delay is sinful.
Feast with your allies; start the custom now.”
The meal was over; he had food and wine
Brought back, and led the men to seats of turf.
A shaggy lion’s pelt, a maple throne’s
Cushions received Aeneas, guest of honor.
The altar’s priest and chosen keen young men
Served roasted bull, heaped baskets with the gifts
That Ceres grants to work, and poured the wine.
Aeneas and the other Trojans savored
A whole ox chine and sacrificial entrails.
When they had got the better of their hunger,
Royal Evander said, “No superstition
About old gods imposed this ritual,
This feast, this altar for a mighty being.
No, Trojan guest: saved from a savage peril,
We owe a deity this yearly rite.
First, see that cliff with overhanging rocks,
The desolation of that mountain house,
The far-­flung boulders of a giant crag fall.
A cave was there, immense in its recesses,
Half-­human, hideous Cacus’ home, cut off
From the sun’s rays. The ground was always wet
With fresh gore. Hanging on barbaric doors
Were pallid heads of men, decayed and grisly.
193–94–­A cave was there . . . Cacus’
home: Vergil adapts a local Italian myth
about Vulcan’s son Cacus.

. 208 .

170

175

180

185

190

195

BOOK 8
Vulcan had sired the monster. Cacus spewed
Vulcan’s flames blackly, moving in his vast bulk.
At last, we had, as people do, an answer
To long prayers, and a god arrived to help us:
Hercules, great avenger, proud of killing
Three-­bodied Geryon, and of the spoils:
Huge cattle grazed and waded in this valley.
Cacus’ depraved and Fury-­haunted mind
Could leave no treachery or crime untried.
He took four splendid grazing bulls away,
And four resplendent heifers. To prevent them
From making hoofprints in the right direction,
He dragged them by their tails, reversed their tracks,
And hid the stolen creatures in his dark cave.
No evidence would lead you to the place.
Amphitryon’s son now prepared to drive
His cattle onward—they had grazed their fill.
But their complaining lowing filled the forest;
With a great noise, they moved off from the hills.
One of the captives in the monstrous cave
Lowed back and thwarted Cacus’ plans to keep her.
At this, black fury blazed up in Alcides.
He snatched the heavy knotted club, his weapon,
And quickly scaled the steep and lofty mountain.
Then we saw Cacus fearful and tormented
For the first time as, faster than the East Wind,
He sought his cave. His feet were winged with terror.
He shut himself inside and broke the chain
His father’d forged for holding up the boulder,
Which toppled now, to barricade the door.

203–­the spoils: the cattle of the monster Geryon, taken as one of Hercules’
Labors.
213–­Amphitryon’s son: Hercules,

200

205

210

215

220

225

who is properly the son of Jupiter; Amphitryon is his stepfather.
219–­Alcides: Another name for Hercules.

. 209 .

BOOK 8
But now the furious Tirynthian
Was there. He gnashed his teeth and peered all over
For a way in. He raged three times around
The Aventine; three times he tried the stone door
And each time fell back, winded, in the valley.
A spire of flint, with sheared rocks all around it,
Rose from the cave’s roof, dizzying to see:
A fitting place for ghastly birds to nest.
It slanted from the ridge above the river
On the left. Wrenching from the right, he freed it,
And tore it from its roots and shoved it over.
The heights of heaven shuddered at the impact.
The stream fled backward, terrified; the banks burst.
Now Cacus’ massive caverned court was opened,
Its shadowed depths exposed—as if some power
Should split the earth clear to the resting places
In Hades and uncover that pale kingdom
The gods hate. From above, the huge abyss
Would show, the spirits tremble at the light.
The monster in the rocky hole was caught
In sudden day—he’d never howled like this.
Above, the hero persecuted him
With everything at hand, with boughs, with boulders.
Cacus in turn—since there was no escape—
Belched out a flood of smoke (amazing sight)
And wrapped his quarters in a blinding darkness,
Tearing away our view of him and heaping
A smoky, fire-­flecked midnight in the cavern.
Fierce Hercules had had enough. He plunged
Straight to the center, where the smoke surged highest,

228–­Tirynthian: Hercules was linked
with the Mycenaean city of Tiryns, his
base of operations during his Twelve
Labors.

230

235

240

245

250

255

231–­Aventine: One of the seven hills
of Rome.

. 210 .

BOOK 8
A black cloud seething from that giant cave.
There he caught Cacus spewing useless flames
In darkness, pinned and throttled him until
His eyes popped and his throat was dry and bloodless.
Now with the doors torn off, the black lair open,
The sky saw looted cows he’d tried to hide.
The ugly corpse was pulled out by the feet.
Men couldn’t satisfy their hearts with gazing
At the half-­human creature’s fearsome eyes,
His bristling chest, his face, his mouth—its fires dead.
Ever since then, we have observed this day;
Potitius was the founder of the cult,
But the Pinarian clan tends it now.
And in this grove he set the Greatest Altar—
We call it so; so it will always be.
Come, young men, give this heroism honor.
Garland your hair; with cups in your right hands,
Invoke the gods we share with glad libations.”
Hercules’ dappled dangling poplar leaves
Covered the king’s head now, and he had taken
The holy cup in hand. Keenly, all present
Prayed to the gods, with wine poured on the table.
The sky moved down, and evening drew in closer.
Potitius led a file of priests, who wore
The ritual belted furs and carried torches.
Again they feasted, bringing pleasant gifts
For the next course, and full trays heaped the altars.
The Salii, in crowns of poplar branches,

269–70–­Potitius . . . Pinarian clan:
Families of Rome who were in charge of
the cult of Hercules.
271–­Greatest Altar: The ara maxima,
in the Forum Boarium at Rome.

260

265

270

275

280

285

276–­poplar leaves: The poplar was
associated with Hercules.
285–­Salii: Roman priests usually associated with Mars; they recur at 8.663.

. 211 .

BOOK 8
Gathered to chant around the lighted altars.
A young choir and an old one sang the valor
Of Hercules, how he first throttled monsters,
The twin snakes that his father’s wife had sent,
Then overthrew Oechalia and Troy,
Towns great in war. For King Eurystheus
He endured countless labors, through the spite
Of Juno. “Triumphs everywhere! You slaughtered
The cloud-­born Centaurs Pholus and Hylaeus,
The Cretan beast, the giant Nemean lion.
You panicked Stygian pools and Hades’ guard,
Sprawled over gnawed bones in his bloody cave.
You even faced Typhoeus with his weapons
Raised high. You found a way to kill the Hydra
Of Lerna, with its crowd of heads that ringed you.
Greetings, Jove’s new son, true god in your glory.
Come to your ritual with happy omens.”
Such were the exploits that they sang—above all
The cave and fire-­breathing Cacus in it.
The whole woods echoed, and the hills resounded.
The rites were over. Everyone returned

289–­twin snakes: Jealous of her husband’s affair, Juno sent snakes to kill the
infant Hercules in his cradle.
290–­Oechalia and Troy: Two cities
sacked by Hercules.
291–93–­King Eurystheus . . . spite
of Juno: Driven mad by Juno, Hercules
killed his wife and son and was ordered
to perform his Twelve Labors for King
Eurystheus as penance. The speech that
follows touches on several of them.
294– ­cloud-­born Centaurs: See
7.674n.
295–­Cretan beast . . . Nemean lion:
The Cretan beast was a wild bull sent by

290

295

300

305

Neptune; the hide of the Nemean lion
could not be pierced by any weapon.
These were two of Hercules’ Twelve
Labors.
296–­Hades’ guard: Cerberus. One
of the Labors was to fetch him from the
Underworld.
298–­Typhoeus: One of the Giants;
Hercules fought the Giants when they
attacked the Olympian gods.
299–300 Hydra of Lerna: The
hundred-­headed Hydra grew two new
heads for each head cut off; during one
of the Labors, Hercules cauterized each
stump when he cut off the head.

. 212 .

BOOK 8
Into the city. Slowed by age, the king
Kept his son and Aeneas close beside him
And spoke of various things to ease the walk.
Aeneas gazed all over, much impressed.
For everything he had an eager question,
And learned of what the men of old had left there.
Rome’s fortress builder, King Evander, told him,
“The native fauns and nymphs once shared this forest
With men, a tribe born out of flinty oak trunks—
Primitive, ignorant of yoking oxen,
And how to gather goods and how to keep them.
The trees and savage hunting gave them food.
Saturn was first to come, a kingly exile
Running from high Olympus and Jove’s violence.
This race, untaught and scattered in high mountains,
He brought together under law and called it
“Latin” from “latent” safety in this country.
Under this king the age that they call Golden
Arrived, and in great peace he ruled the people,
Till slowly a degraded age came on
With its war frenzy and its burning greed.
Then came Ausonians, and Sicanian tribes—
The land of Saturn often changed its name.
There were kings, such as giant, cruel King Thybris,
After whom we Italians call this river.
The Albula has lost its ancient name.
All-­ruling Fortune, fate with no escape,
319–­Saturn: Jupiter deposed his
father Saturn, who is said to have gone
into exile in Latium.
323–­
“Latin” from “latent”: Vergil links “Latin” with the verb lateo, “lie
hidden,” because Saturn lay hidden in
Latium from his son Jupiter.

310

315

320

325

330

324–­the age that they call Golden:
An idyllic early period of human existence, the first and best in a series of progressively declining ages; Silver, Bronze,
and Iron followed.
330–­giant, cruel King Thybris: His
name may connect with the Greek word
hybris, “violence.”

. 213 .

BOOK 8
Apollo’s mandate and the nymph Carmentis
My mother’s fearsome warnings sent me here,
An exile to the ocean’s farthest edge.”
Not pausing, he went on and showed the altar
And gate the Romans gave the name Carmental:
This was an early honor for Carmentis,
Who first claimed future glory for the line
Aeneas sired, and for Pallanteum.
In this large grove would be fierce Romulus’
Asylum. Chill cliffs roofed the Lupercal,
Named for Arcadia’s Lycaean Pan.
He showed the sacred grove, the Argiletum,
And told how Argus, though a guest, was killed there.
Tarpeia’s Rock rose, and the Capitol—
Gold now, then overgrown with forest brambles.
That cliff and woods made rustics quake already:
They felt a deadly power in the place.
“A god (but which?) lives in this grove, this hummock
Topped with leaves,” said the king. “Arcadians
Think they see Jove himself here often, shaking
His dusky aegis, summoning the storm clouds.

334– ­Carmentis: The mother of
Evander, worshipped in Rome as a goddess of prophecy and childbirth.
342–43–­Romulus’ asylum: The “asy‑
lum” on the Capitoline Hill, where Romu­
lus invited the dispossessed from other
nations to live.
343–44–­Lupercal, named for Arca­
dia’s Lycaean Pan: A cave of the god Lupercus at the foot of the Palantine Hill,
where the wolf that reared Romulus and
Remus was said to have lived; Pan’s epithet “Lycaeus” means “wolfish” in Greek.
345–­Argiletum: Literally “death of

335

340

345

350

Argus”; Argus was a Greek who plotted
to kill his host Evander but instead was
killed by Evander’s subjects.
347–­Tarpeia’s Rock: Steep cliff on
the Capitoline Hill, named after Tarpeia, who betrayed the Romans in their
war with the Sabines. Especially notorious criminals were thrown off it to their
deaths.
348–­Gold now, then overgrown with
forest brambles: The Capitoline Hill
was the location of the temple of Jupiter
Optimus Maximus, restored with gilding
by Augustus in 26 BCE.

. 214 .

BOOK 8
But these two towns with ruined walls you see
Are records left of men who came before.
Old Janus built this fort, Janiculum,
And Saturn this one, called Saturnia.”
They then moved toward Evander’s simple home;
His lowing cattle ranged on what is now
Rome’s Forum and the elegant Carinae.
They reached the house. “Hercules stooped inside
And found this palace big enough,” the king said.
“Friend, scorn wealth boldly; you too must be ready
For godhead—come, don’t sneer at my poor home.”
Beneath the narrow roof he led Aeneas,
A towering man, and placed him on a couch
Of leaves; a Libyan bearskin lay across it.
Night fell, embracing earth in her dark wings.

355

Venus’ maternal terror had its reasons:
Laurentum threatened, shameless tumult spread.
These words to her spouse, Vulcan, in their bedroom
Of gold breathed supernatural passion through him.
“While the Greek kings pressed on to pillage Troy,
Whose citadel would fall in fated flames.
I asked no help, no weapon from your art
For the poor things, dear husband. I had no wish
To see your work and trouble go for nothing—
Though I owed much to Priam’s sons and often
Cried for the bitter hardships of Aeneas.
Now Jove’s will sets him on Rutulian shores.

370

357–­Janiculum: The hill across the
Tiber.
358–­Saturnia: On the Capitoline
Hill.
361–­Rome’s Forum and the elegant

360

365

375

380

Carinae: The Forum was the center of
urban life in Rome; Carinae was a Roman district named for some of its buildings, which looked like the keels of ships
(carinae).

. 215 .

BOOK 8
I ask your holy honored self for arms,
A mother for her son. Nereus’ daughter,
Tithonus’ wife—they wept and won you over.
I see tribes massing, gates shut, iron sharpened
Against me, to eradicate my people.”
He wavered. Tenderly the goddess wrapped him
In her white arms and fondled him. In no time
He took in the familiar flame. The old heat
Ran through his bones and shook him to the marrow,
As when a streak of flame, ripped loose by thunder,
Flashes and shoots through clouds with its intense light.
His wife was glad—her tricks and beauty worked.
Bound in eternal love, the great god spoke:
“Why far-­fetched pretexts? You had faith in me
In the past, Goddess. Had you wanted it
Back then, I would have rightly armed the Trojans,
Since neither fate nor the almighty father
Had outlawed ten more years for Troy and Priam.
But if you’re now preparing for a war,
Whatever help my skill and care can promise,
Anything that the force of fire and bellows
Can make from melted iron and electrum
Is yours. Don’t plead for it and doubt your powers.”
He then made tender love to her and melted
Into sweet slumber in his wife’s embrace.
But when he woke from his first sleep, and Night
Had finished half her course—the hour a woman
Who makes a flimsy living from her craft
Of spinning wakes the sleeping ashes, adding
Night hours to work, with slaves kept at their long tasks
By firelight, to bring up her little children
383–84–­Nereus’ daughter, Tithonus’
wife: Thetis, mother of Achilles, and the
dawn goddess Aurora, mother of Mem-

385

390

395

400

405

410

non, had persuaded Vulcan to forge arms
for their sons.

. 216 .

BOOK 8
And guard her marriage bed from any shame:
At that hour, and as tirelessly, the fire god
Rose from his soft bed to his craft. An island
Rears high, with smoking cliffs, beside the coast
Of Sicily and Aeolian Lipari.
Dug underneath it are the caves of Etna
For the loud forges of the Cyclops clan.
The anvils boom and echo with strong blows,
Dipped iron squeals, and forges roar with fire
In Vulcan’s house, in the land named for him.
From the sky’s heights the fire god came, to find
His workers beating iron in that vast cave:
Brontes, Steropes, half-­stripped Pyracmon.
They had in hand a new-­forged thunderbolt,
Part perfect, part unfinished, such as Zeus
The father hurls to earth in lavish numbers.
On it they put three shafts of twisted rain,
Three each of wet cloud, red flame, winged South Wind,
And then mixed lightning in, and noise, and terror,
And added wrath with its pursuing fires.
Others worked hard at Mars’ winged chariot
For stirring soldiers, for inciting cities;
Others were busy at the ghastly aegis,
Armor of Pallas in her rage. They polished
The gold scales and the snake-­twined, wild-­eyed head—
The Gorgon who adorned the goddess’ breastplate.
“Get rid of all this, Cyclops race of Etna,
And start this new work,” Vulcan told them now.
415–17–­An island . . . Lipari: The
island Hiera, modern Marettimo, off the
western coast of Sicily.
422–­the land named for him: The
island named “Volcani insula” (Vulcan’s
island) is sometimes identified with
modern Hiera.

415

420

425

430

435

440

425–­Brontes, Steropes, . . . Pyrac­
mon: In Greek their names mean “lightning,” “thunder,” and “fire anvil.”
438–­The Gorgon: Medusa, the fe‑
male monster whose severed head was
part of the aegis (shield or breastplate)
of Minerva.

. 217 .

BOOK 8
“A man with heart needs weapons. You need strength
And quick hands, and your craft’s full mastery.
Hurry!” He said no more. All swiftly bent
To work, dividing it in equal shares.
Soon rivulets of bronze and gold were flowing.
Wound-­making steel was melting in the huge forge.
They formed a giant shield, with seven disks
Bound into layers fit to meet the weapons
Of all the Latins. Some pump windy bellows,
Others dip hissing bronze work in the basin.
The cavern groans with blows on steady anvils.
Alternately they raise their mighty arms
In rhythm; with tight tongs they turn the ingots.
Aeolian Vulcan hurried on this work,
As tender light and birdsong from the eaves
Wakened Evander in his simple home.
The old man rose, tied on Etruscan sandals,
Draped himself in a tunic, hung a sword belt
And an Arcadian sword from his right shoulder,
While from the other swept a panther skin.
Down from the doorstep two dogs came with him
And closely paced before their master’s steps.
He sought his guest Aeneas’ quarters, thinking—
The good man—of their talk and what he’d promised.
Aeneas too rose early; with Achates
He went to meet Evander and his son.
The men clasped hands and seated in the courtyard,
Finally found a chance for a discussion.
The king began:
“Great Trojan chief, as long as you’re alive,
I’d never call the power of Troy defeated.
We can give little help to match your glory.
The Tiber blocks us on one side. The other

. 218 .

445

450

455

460

465

470

BOOK 8
Clangs with Rutulian weapons at our walls.
But I propose to join vast nations to you,
And armed camps rich with empire; chance has given
Relief unlooked-­for; fate has called you here.
Not far off, on its ancient stone foundation,
Is Argylla. War-­renowned Lydians
Settled there long ago, on Tuscan uplands
And throve for many years. Mezentius
Then came to rule by force, a brazen tyrant.
Unspeakable, his butcheries, his frenzies.
Gods, bring the same to him—and to his children.
He even tied dead bodies onto live ones,
Hands against hands and faces against faces—
His special torture. In this grim embrace,
His victims slowly died, in liquid rot.
At last his people, worn down by his riots
Of horrors, placed his household under siege,
Shot his roof full of flame and killed his henchmen.
Mezentius escaped, though, and took refuge
Among Rutulian arms, as Turnus’ guest-­friend.
Now all Etruria rose in rightful anger,
Calling for his return, on pain of war.
I’ll give you to these thousands as a leader.
Their vessels pack the shore, the soldiers clamor
For battle; an old augur’s prophecies
Hold them back. ‘Chosen youth of Lydia,
Brave flower of an ancient warrior tribe,
Driven by just rage at Mezentius’ crimes!
You must not serve a man of Italy.
Wait for a foreigner.’ The Tuscan army
Has not marched on, in fear of heaven’s warning.
479–­Argylla . . . Lydians: Argylla is
the Etruscan city of Caere. The Etrus-

475

480

485

490

495

500

cans were said to come from Lydia, in
Asia Minor.

. 219 .

BOOK 8
Tarchon himself sent legates to deliver
The crown and rod of kingship and a summons
To camp, where I could take up Tuscan rule.
But weary old age, slow and cold, denies me
Command; my strength for daring now lies sluggish.
I’d urge my son, but he’s a part of this land:
His mother’s Sabine. Fate approves your age
And lineage. Heaven calls you. Come, begin,
Heroic Trojan and Italian leader.
I’ll even lend my only joy and comfort,
Pallas—you’ll be his guide. From your example,
He’ll grow accustomed to Mars’ heavy work.
Let him from early youth hold you in awe.
Two hundred chosen knights, rock of my army,
I’ll give him, and he’ll give you just as many
In his own name.” Anchises’ son Aeneas
And trustworthy Achates kept their eyes down.
Sad-­hearted, they turned many harsh thoughts over—
But Venus gave a portent up above.
Astonishingly, lightning flashed from heaven,
And thunder boomed, as if the sky were falling;
And like a Tuscan horn the high air sounded.
They looked up, and the blaring blasts continued.
In calm clear sky, between the clouds they saw
Weapons glow red; they clashed like thunderclaps.
It stunned them all—except the Trojan hero,
Who knew the sound, pledge of his goddess mother.
“Guest-­friend,” he said, “these signs allow no doubt:
Olympus calls me. My immortal mother
505–­Tarchon: Founder of the Etruscan town Tarquinii, and an ally of Aeneas.
511–­Sabine: The Sabines were native
Italians, so although Evander is Greek,
his son is not fully “foreign.”

505

510

515

520

525

530

515–­your example: Role models were
central to Roman thought.
524–25–­
lightning . . . thunder:
Thunder and lightning in a clear sky signified an extremely important omen.

. 220 .

BOOK 8
Promised this sign, a covenant for wartime,
And said she’d bring me weapons made by Vulcan
Down through the air.
The slaughter waiting for the poor Laurentians!
The punishment for Turnus! All the helmets,
Shields, brave men’s bodies rolling in old Tiber!
Let them break treaties, let them have their war.”
He rose from his high seat. Hercules’ altar
Was smoldering; he stirred its ashes up,
Then cheerfully approached the lowly home gods
He knew from yesterday. Evander slaughtered
Chosen sheep; Troy’s young men performed the same rite.
Returning to his ships and friends, Aeneas
Chose all the ablest men to follow him
To war; the others glided with the fleet
Slackly downriver to Ascanius
With news of how things stood, and of his father.
The Trojans headed for the Tuscan plains
Were given mounts; Aeneas’ special one
Wore a sand-­colored gold-­clawed lion pelt.
Suddenly Rumor flew all through the small town:
Horsemen were speeding to the Tuscan camp.
Over and over mothers prayed: their terror
Grew with the danger, and Mars’ specter grew.
Father Evander now took Pallas’ hand
In parting, and he couldn’t stop his tears.
“If only Jove restored my youth and made me
Again the victor at Praeneste, throwing
The front ranks down, then burning heaps of shields—!
That day I sent King Erulus to Hades,
Feronia, his mother, gave him three lives—
561–­Praeneste: modern Palestrina, in
the Apennines, not far from Rome.

. 221 .

535

540

545

550

555

560

BOOK 8
Monstrous—and triple weapons for attack.
He had to be cut down three times; I took
Each soul from him, three times I stripped his weapons.
My former self would not be torn from you,
My child; Mezentius would not insult me,
His neighbor, with so much barbaric slaughter
And a town widowed of so many townsmen.
You, gods above, and your great governor
Jupiter, pity an Arcadian king,
And hear a father’s prayer. If your divine power
And fate will keep my Pallas safe for me,
And if I live to see him face to face,
I beg to live, no matter what I suffer.
But if you threaten the unspeakable,
Then, Fortune, break my wretched life off now,
While fears are unconfirmed, hope arguable,
While you, dear son, sole pleasure of my old age,
Are in my arms, and no hard news is wounding
My ears.” The father, at the last farewell,
Poured out these words, and swooned. Slaves took him home.

565

The cavalry had passed the gates: Aeneas
And staunch Achates in the leading rank,
Then other Trojan nobles; in the middle
Went Pallas in a vivid cloak and armor;
As, soaked in Ocean’s waters, Lucifer,
Whom Venus loves above all other stars,
Raises his sacred face and melts the darkness.
Up on the wall stood frightened mothers, gazing
After the dust cloud and the bronze-­bright squadrons.
These marched off in their armor through the brush,
The closest way. A shout rose from the column.

585

589–­Lucifer: The Morning Star, literally “Light Bearer.”

. 222 .

570

575

580

590

595

BOOK 8
Horses’ hooves rumbled on the loose-­earthed plain.
There is a forest near cool Caere’s stream,
Widely held sacred by an old tradition.
Hills covered in black firs encircle it.
They say the old Greeks, first to live in Latium,
Made this a shrine, with its own holy day,
For the god ruling fields and herds, Silvanus.
Tarchon and his Etruscans pitched their tents
In a safe site nearby. A hilltop view
Showed the whole army camped across the plain.
Father Aeneas and his picked troops came here
Tired, cared for their mounts, and ate and rested.
Snowy-­white holy Venus brought her presents
Through heaven’s clouds. Far off, she saw her son
In a secluded valley, by a cold stream.
She went straight up to him and spoke these words:
“My husband’s gifts are finished, with the skill
He pledged. So don’t hang back from challenging
The arrogant Laurentians or fierce Turnus.”
Then the Cytherean embraced her son,
And set the gleaming arms beneath the oak.
The goddess’ gift—the honor of it—thrilled him.
He couldn’t fill his gaze with every piece.
With awe he picked them up and turned them over:
The fearsome helmet with its flaming crest,
The deadly sword, the blood-­red corselet stiff
With bronze—enormous, like a cloud, blue-­shaded
But kindling with the sky’s far-­stretching rays;
Then the smooth greaves of forged gold and electrum,

597–­Caere: The Etruscan city where
Mezentius had ruled.
602–­Silvanus: A woodland god.
615–­the Cytherean: The island
Cythera was sacred to Venus.

600

605

610

615

620

616–­the gleaming arms: The “Shield
of Aeneas” section is Vergil’s adaptation
of Homer’s famous description of the
shield of Achilles in Iliad 18.

. 223 .

BOOK 8
The spear, the shield—work beyond all description.
There the fire god had etched Italian history
And Roman triumphs, from the prophecies
He knew: Ascanius’ whole line to come,
And every war the clan would fight, in sequence.
There lay a mother wolf, in Mars’ green grotto.
Playful twin boys were hanging on her teats,
Fearlessly suckling on their foster-­mother.
She arched her neck above the pair and licked
Either in turn, to shape them with her tongue.
Beside this he’d put Rome, and Sabine women
Snatched—such a lawless act—from crowded stands
At the Great Games. Old Tatius, with his stern folk
Of Cures, warred again with Romulus
And his settlers. It was over then: the two kings
Stood before armed Jove’s altar, holding bowls,
Their treaty hallowed by a slaughtered sow.
Next, chariot teams tore Mettus limb from limb
(You should have kept your promise, man of Alba);
The liar’s guts were scattered through the woods
By Tullus—blood dew spattered bramble bushes.

626–­the fire god: Vulcan.
626–27–­Italian history and Roman
triumphs: Vergil concentrates on early
Roman legend then moves rapidly to the
contemporary Battle of Actium, omitting
many notable events, including the invasion of Hannibal.
630–31–­a mother wolf, . . . playful
twin boys: Romulus and Remus, the
former being the founder of Rome. Sons
of Mars, they were suckled by a she-­wolf
in the Lupercal: see 8.343–44n.
635–36–­
Sabine women snatched:
Facing a shortage of women, early Ro-

625

630

635

640

645

man men abducted local Sabine women
and married them, an event referred to as
the rape of the Sabine women.
637–38–­Tatius, with his stern folk of
Cures: Tatius was the king of the Sabines
who went to war with Romulus, the first
king of Rome; Cures was a Sabine town.
642–45–­chariot teams tore Mettus
limb from limb . . . Tullus: Mettus Fufetius, ruler of Alba Longa, wavered in
supporting Rome in battle; the third Roman king, Tullius Hostilius, condemned
him to be torn apart by horses driven in
opposite directions.

. 224 .

BOOK 8
Porsenna ordered Rome to take back Tarquin,
And with a massive force besieged the city.
Aeneas’ people dashed to arms, for freedom.
You saw the threat and anger on his face—
When Cocles dared to tear the bridge apart
And Cloelia broke her chains and swam the river.
Near the shield’s top was Manlius, who guarded
Tarpeia’s heights, the Capitol and temple;
Romulus’ palace still had bristling fresh thatch.
In the gold portico a silver goose,
Flapping and calling, warned that Gauls had come.
Stealing up through the brush, they’d reached the stronghold,
Protected by the favor of dark Night.
Their hair was shaggy gold, their clothes were gold,
Their striped cloaks shone, around their milky necks
Were twists of gold; each rattled in his hand
Two Alpine pikes; long shields were their protection.
From the god’s hammer Salii had leapt,
And naked Luperci, wool caps, shields fallen
Out of the sky. In dainty carts chaste matrons
646–­Porsenna: The Etruscan king
Lars Porsenna besieged Rome after the
Romans deposed their last king, Tarquinius Superbus, who was of Etruscan origin. He was impressed by several Roman
acts of bravery, described below.
650– ­Cocles: Horatius Cocles, who
single-­
handedly held a bridge during
Porsenna’s initial attack.
651– ­Cloelia: A Roman hostage of
Porsenna who escaped his camp by
swimming across the Tiber
652–­Manlius: A Roman general who
in 390 BCE with a small contingent of
soldiers held off the Gauls’ attack on
Rome via the Tarpeian Rock (8.347n.).
654–­Romulus’ palace still had bris­

650

655

660

665

tling fresh thatch: The thatched house
of Romulus on the Capitoline Hill, a historical monument in Vergil’s time.
655–­silver goose: Manlius was
alerted to the Gauls’ night attack on the
Capitoline Hill by the honking of the
sacred geese.
663–­Salii: See 8.285n.
664–­Luperci: Priests of Lupercus,
a fertility god, whose festival was celebrated by the Luperci running half-­
naked through the streets striking people
with goads; see 8.343–44n.
664–65–­
shields fallen out of the
sky: Sacred shields were believed to have
fallen from the sky during the reign of
Numa.

. 225 .

BOOK 8
Brought holy objects through the town. Far off
Were Dis’ high gates, the settlement of Hades
Where crimes are punished. From a looming cliff
Catiline hangs and quivers at the Furies.
The good live elsewhere; Cato makes their laws.
A picture of the swollen sea, in gold,
Wound through these scenes and billowed, foaming white.
Bright silver dolphins circled in the rim’s spume
And swept the surface with their tails. The fleets,
Braced with bronze, were lined up at Actium
In the shield’s center. All of Leucata
Was seething with them. Gold shone on the waves.
Caesar Augustus led the Roman forces—
Senate and people, hearth gods, mighty sky gods.
High on the stern he stood; from his glad forehead
Poured two flames. From his head his father’s star rose.
Elsewhere Agrippa—gods and winds both helped him—
Led the line from on high, bright naval ship beaks
Crowning him proudly. Antony, the victor
Over the Eastern lands, over the Red Sea,
Brought foreign wealth and motley troops against them.
Egypt, and Eastern power, and farthest Bactra
669– ­Catiline: Lucius Sergius Catilina, a patrician who in 63 BCE plotted
to overthrow the Roman Republic before
being exposed by the consul Cicero.
670–­Cato: Cato the Younger, a proponent of Stoic philosophy who was
known for his moral integrity.
676–­Leucata: Site of the Battle of Actium; see 3.280n.
678– ­Caesar Augustus: At the time
he was still named Octavian; he would
not be given the title of Augustus until
27 BCE.
680–­High on the stern he stood:
In the Latin, exactly the same phrase is

670

675

680

685

used to describe Anchises at 3.526–27 and
Aeneas at 10.261, thus linking Augustus
with his claimed ancestors.
682–­Agrippa: Marcus Vipsanius
Agrippa, Augustus’ admiral, who was
largely responsible for the victory at Actium.
684–­Antony, the victor: Antony had
recently led successful campaigns against
the Parthians.
687–­Egypt: The last of the Roman
civil wars occurred when Antony, previously Octavian’s ally, took up arms
against Rome after the Senate declared
war on his lover Cleopatra.

. 226 .

BOOK 8
Were in his train, and his Egyptian wife
Followed him—outrage! Now the navies clashed.
Beaks, backed oars, triple spikes churned sea to foam.
To the deep! You’d imagine Delos torn loose
And floating, or high mountains smashed together:
Men moved to battle on such towering sterns.
Oakum in flames and iron weapons soared.
Neptune’s fields reddened. In the midst the queen
Rallied her ranks, shaking her country’s sistrum—
Not seeing yet the two snakes etched behind her.
The dog Anubis and all sorts of beast gods
Faced off with Venus, Neptune, and Minerva;
And Mars raged in the center of the battle,
Engraved in iron; grisly Furies hovered,
Discord stalked in a tattered robe, contented.
Bellona followed with her bloody whip.
From his high cliff-­top shrine Apollo saw,
And aimed his bow. Egyptians, Indians,
Arabs, Sabaeans turned and fled in terror.
The queen was pictured calling on the winds
And just then slacking ropes to spread the sails.
The smith god made her pale among the slaughter.
She faced her death; the waves and the northwester
Swept her along. The mighty Nile, in mourning,
Opened his arms and giant cloak and beckoned
688–89–­His Egyptian wife . . . out­
rage!: As Cleopatra was a foreigner, her
affair with Antony was not a lawful Roman marriage.
691–­Delos: That is, the ships were so
large they appeared to be islands. For Delos as a “free-­floating” island, see 3.73n.
696–­sistrum: An Egyptian musical
instrument resembling a rattle.
697–­two snakes: Cleopatra will later
commit suicide by asp bite.

690

695

700

705

710

698–­Anubis and all sorts of beast
gods: Anubis was a dog-­headed Egyptian god. The animal components of
Egyptian deities seemed bizarre to
Romans.
704–­cliff-­top shrine: Apollo had a
temple at Actium.
709–­The smith god: Vulcan.

. 227 .

BOOK 8
The conquered to retreat to his blue delta.
Caesar rode into Rome in triple triumph
And gave our gods their holy lasting payment:
Three hundred towering shrines throughout the city.
Streets roared with celebration and applause.
Offerings filled the temples, mothers danced,
And slaughtered calves were sprawled before the altars.
Sitting at shining Phoebus’ snowy threshold,
He viewed the nations’ gifts and had them mounted
On the proud doors. All kinds of clothing, weapons,
And languages filed by in captive order:
Leleges, Carians, loose-­robed Africans,
Nomads, Gelonian archers. The Euphrates
Walked with meek waves; the two-­horned Rhine walked by;
Remote Morini, Dahae now first conquered,
And the Araxes, fuming at his new bridge.
Aeneas, thrilled by Vulcan’s scenic shield,
His mother’s gift, knew nothing of the stories.
He shouldered his descendants’ glorious fate.

714–­
in triple triumph: Augustus
held a three-­
day triumph in 29 BCE
when he returned to Rome.
716–­
Three
hundred
towering
shrines: Augustus consecrated many
temples and shrines during his lifetime.
720–21–­Phoebus’ snowy threshold,
he viewed the nations’ gifts: Octavian

715

720

725

730

sits on the marble portico of the temple
of Apollo on the Palatine.
725–28–­Euphrates . . . Araxes: Rivers
representing various peoples conquered
by the Romans; in triumphal processions rivers were depicted as chained
river deities.

. 228 .
